William P. TomlinsonTHE WOMAN'S ADVOCATENO. I. January, 1870. VOL. III.Antoinette Brown BlackwellTHE MARKET WOMAN.[Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1860, by Antoinette Brown Blackwell, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of New York.]CHAPTER V.
BABY AND THE TWELVE ACRE LOT.Two years have passed and a third Spring has come with its beauty as new and fresh as life is to every new being who enters upon it. Among the number of those who drop in upon us at every beat of the steady pulse of time, was a redfaced, wee baby who came nearly four month ago into the Reband household, to the satisfaction of all and the intense delight of the grandmother who rejoiced over a son and heir to inherit the brightened family prospects. The young parents look at the small thing in love and wonder, as most parents do at the first child, the father afraid even to touch it; and persisting in his fixed impression that it must be as brittle as it was soft. But all that feeling had long since passed away; for the plump, round baby, who held up his head, looking about the room so bravely and smiling in everybody's face, was a thing to be laid hold of in warm approval.The family fortunes were steadily looking up. The pasture was well stocked with cows and the yard with poultry; and field after field. had been turned into rich and friable truck gardens. Two men and a boy were employed now to help in the fields, and a half-grown girl waited on baby, ran errands, and washed 
dishes. The sensible market woman had not wrought on with her usual unceasing
toil in house and field before the birth of her child. She was too prudent thus to borrow from the energy due to her own future and to that of her unborn babe; yet through all the Summer and Fall, she and her pink sunbonnet were always at their post in the market, and her busy fingers had learned to ply the market knitting needles unceasingly while she waited for customers.At home she kept the same alert oversight and its accompanying stimulants; but so without empressment were her suggestions, that they were often adopted under the fixed impression that they originated with the person chosen to put them into execution. Mrs. Reband, the elder, had ceased to feel mortified at the thought that her son's wife was a market woman, and had already grown even proud of her as an unusually successful and respected business woman.Her own eyes bad beheld the unassuming dignity with which Susan maintained the respectability of her position; conducting all her negotiations in a straightforward and womanly way, which won a corresponding respect from others. Rich Mr. Verplank, their first and staunchest customer, had even driven out to see them; to admire their thrifty modes of farming, and to praise the plucky and sensible daughter-in-law to the old lady; and Mr. Verplank, in her eyes, was law and gospel high enough to satisfy any remaining scruples. His opinion was heavy enough to outweigh that of a dozen chatty, lightweighted neighbors.John, like a magnanimous man as he was, had tried his hand also at marketing; but nature had never fitted him for the calling, and to him it was an annoying, perpetual cross,-though a cross which he took up and bore on bravely when the need came. To Susan it was much more like a crown; if there were some hard points in it which pressed at times sharply upon her brow, yet she was always compensated by the sparkle of the real jewels. For John to face a customer, asking the highest current price, was a trial; but to stand his price steadily when a poor woman begged to have just a penny or two thrown off, was next to impossible. It was harder to contend and chaffer with her than it would have been to receive a dozen pricks with a knife-point; and when be came off victorious, that was worst of all!  A sense of degradation clung to him which it seemed impossible to shake off. He rarely left the market without a feeling akin to that of Pontius Pilate when he washed his hands to testify his innocence to the people. He felt his weakness and admired his wife's strength. The easy .aptness with which she was able to meet every emergency without the least stress of self-compulsion, was his continual admiration; for he was a genuine and unquestioning lover. His Susan could touch pitch and yet not be defiled.  He thought of her as of a white lily he had seen anchored in a pond whose
muddy waters, stirred by the winds, washed over it perpetually without sullying its whiteness.But it was useless to attempt to imitate her. And vain was it to reason on the subject or to try to slough off a sentiment so ingrained with all the tissues of his being. This endless dealing in trifling values must be chronically distasteful! To work hard and to live on coarse fire was quite possible and enjoyable, though he was really an ease-loving man by temperament; but he could overbear his own indolence, though he could not stand upright under the friction of that continual, "It is nought, it is nought, saith the buyer;" and the legitimate consequence was, that too often, when his customer was gone, he boasted. Yet for all this John was not the favorite with the buyers. They preferred the evenhanded independence of the genuine huckster, and would often pass the stall and go on farther if John were in waiting; while Susan's restful self-confidence as a dealer was magnetic, and her customers fell under the influence of it without resistance.Neither John nor his mother could fail to discover that the profits fell away steadily whenever he acted as salesman, and that they always came up again as soon as Susan became saleswoman. Under these circumstances, when she proposed a return to the market as the Spring advanced, and she had regained her strength, while John still earnestly objected, with a chivalry worthy of one of the early knights, and an unselfishness akin to that of the first martyrs, his mother seconded Susan, declaring that Julie and she jointly could take care of the baby better than not, and that one bowl of pap daily at his acre would be greatly in favor of the little fellow's strength and digestion. So the experiment was tried, and as Johnnie the second continued to thrive, in confirmation of his grandmother's opinion, the market woman still pursued her calling.At the close of this season they were all looking forward eagerly to the day when the last of the mortgage would be finally paid off. Two years and a half of almost uninterrupted profits had nearly realized this ardent wish of all their hearts. Everything which they had sold--raised on their own grounds and very largely the product of their own labor--had been almost net gain. On the other hand their purchases had been few--little more in fact than seeds for planting, and even these were frequently raised by themselves--a very inconsiderable amount of patent fertilizers, and some gardening implements. Clothing had been an unimportant item and largely home-spun and home-made.Susan was a practical business woman of the pre-eminently safe type. She acted from a keen insight into the nature of all the factors which were to make up the sum total of results, and was never unpleasantly disappointed in her calculations;  the product was invariably larger than she ever ventured to suggest in words to others, or even in her own private estimate, though she always had a tacit understanding with herself that she hoped for a little more than she ever ventured to expect. These hopes were so almost unfailingly realized that there was always coming in a steady surplus fund over and above the family claim of rightful profits. This came as a free gift from Providence in reward for their modest faith, and was accepted by all with especial gratitude. Moreover our heroine was in no sense a speculative money maker. She allowed nothing for possible advance in values, while she always made an estimate of possible depreciations; acting invariably upon the rule not to venture anything unless it would eventuate in certain gain even at the very worst which could reasonably be anticipated.  Of course, If this gave little room for great brilliancy of operations, there was no credible chance of a disastrous issue. In addition to this, she kept steadily and closely to her own calling, never stepping outside in quest of opportunities for great gains, and never suffering herself to be beguiled by sudden riches. She felt herself to be a master in her own line--in any other there was room for doubt.Insight and calculation were applied to the smallest details. In Summer their cows were largely fed from the succulent milk-giving refuse products of the garden, every leaf and weed being utilized either for them or the pigs, while grass, straw, and cornstalks were carefully cured for Winter use. In the Fall they bought calves, chiefly to be sold in the Spring for beef or young cows. Under their management some profit generally accrued from the sale over and above all cost of keep; while their grounds were thus steadily enriched, gratis, as it were, with almost no outlay for expensive fertilizers, which usually so largely reduce the net results. Every fowl was at least made to pay its own way, and its growth from chick to hen was clear profit. Thus it lived an independent bird as it went along, and when its end came, always presented itself as a plump legacy to its patrons; and the best hens even accumulated large surplus wealth. With so rigid a system of animal and vegetable economy as premises, the conclusion became a mathematical certainty. While not even a rooster was allowed to live who wouldn't pay his way by early crowing, thus saving the expense of an alarm clock, and no vegetable was suffered to cumber the ground if it couldn't draw up from hidden sources nutriment for man or beast, the whole farm was certain to be a well ordered working establishment, and sure to pay."A single hundred more, Susy, and all that is squared off," said John, as they counted over the last day's earnings. "How can we ever thank you?""Haven't we done it, John? Don't thank me! we work together.""Yes, we do. I know that, but I know also that mother and I had been going steadily down for ten years; and that we have been going steadily up for less than three, and this is the result!""It is true, John, I am practical and a good manager. We won't lessen my virtues; but wait till I can learn a magnanimity such as you practice every day, and then you may praise me." Susan spoke in real humility; the tears gathering thickly in her eyes."Well, well, child," said the husband in a husky voice, we are both as God made us, and in the main trying to do the best we know how. But the day we pay that off we should keep, like the old Jews, as a perpetual holiday forever. We ought to make a grand feast with sugar, and tea, and coffee, and goodies  g generally. What do you say?""Yes, I am quite willing; but do you know I am thinking of something, John. The twelve acre lot is in the market--our old lot--for sale.""So I heard to-day. Davis told me himself. He asks a hundred and twenty dollars an acre, after all the wood he has cut off, too, and we sold it to him for seventy-five. If we only could get it; but isn't the difference too much?""The times are changing, perhaps," she answered absently, and evidently carrying on a train of mental arithmetic.John waited patiently a few moments, and then his own thoughts went off also in an eager reverie. "It is a part of the old homestead, and it almost broke my heart to sell it, for father's sake. If only we could have it all together again!" He looked into his wife's absorbed face, got up, walked the floor two or three times, and still waited in respectful impatience till Susan's eye cleared and she turned to seek him."Well, Susy, what is it? I would go on with the skim milk and potatoes if necessary for ten years longer, and work an extra hour every day to have the old farm whole again--if you don't mind. This may be the last chance, too, for Wilkins, I hear, stands ready to take it; but Davis promised us the first refusal if he ever wished to sell. Have they run the price up too high between them?""It may be they have; but I think, John, if we buy the lot at that price it will pay for itself, with our present way of doing things at least in six years.""Ha! will it? can you make that clear. Then we have it, of course.""I think so, and that we may also honestly begin to taste a little of our own butter and exchange it for groceries now and then. I want you to try for yourself, Johnniekin, whether my butter is really good or not. You have supposed so long enough on trust, I think.""We will keep our holiday, then, after all," said John, laughing and kissing his wife's hand, which was soft enough and fair enough to suit him in spite of all its toil. "But there will come pay days; and there must be five hundred dollars down, Susan. Those are the express terms, and I think Davis will not vary from them.""Mr. Simpson has bought our red cow and calf, John, to-day, and paid a hundred and five dollars for them. I kept that as a tid-bit to the last. There is the money.""Good, so the mortgage is squared off, if we choose to have it so. Now for the five hundred down, fairy godmother. Where will that come from?""Mr. Verplank has promised to lend it to us, taking only our joint note as security. I told him that the land was for sale, and that we were out of debt otherwise, but should have nothing over till we made it, and he never hesitated but said he would lend it and welcome; for he was not afraid to trust us. I knew how you felt about that twelve acre lot, and that the arrangement would suit you."John stood without speaking, and swallowing hard to clear something from his throat. "Don't tell mother, Sue," be said at length, quietly, "till we have really bought the land. Can't you come at once?"Susan retied her bonnet and they went out together, walking, across the field to the neighbor's house. The purchase of the coveted twelve acres was soon effected, an agreement to that effect was drawn up and signed, and something paid down to doubly bind the bargain; and husband and wife walked home again. Then John mounted his horse and rode away with the money in hand to pay off that old dreadful mortgage; and Susan quietly busied herself with cookery, greatly to the mother's astonishment, who began to suspect that something good was about to happen.When her son came home and they told her all, the old lady first sat down and cried, and then rose up laughing and took her seat at the table, which was spread with the feast of rejoicing.But the new luxury of the undivided homestead was not yet paid for.CHAPTER VI.
THE GOSSIPS."Do tell, Mrs. Dinsmore, if they are bringing Mary up to work in the fields like a boy?""It's just as I tell you, every word, Mrs. Butts.""Well, it beats all how old Mrs. Reband can do it! So nice and particular as she used to be, always the daintiest one amongst us all, and so proud like. She used to think it was too hard for John to work in the sun, and now it seems they are all at it like so many grubs.""Everything's changed with the old lady since she was a grandmother, I can tell you. She's like an old hen with her late summer's brood. It's business enough for her to keep 'em covered up with her old wings in the cold spells; and just moulting, it's likely. She's a real biddy.""Seems wonderful, don't it?""She's just another woman ever since them children came, and don't care for much else.""But making the girl into a boy beats all, and the only girl too, and they getting so rich. I don't understand it!""Mary was picking up potatoes and things all last Saturday, side by side with little John, and as far as I saw, neither of 'em stopped even to play the whole day long. They both go to weeding, or picking things, or something every night as soon as they get home from school; that's what they do, Mrs. Butts. Their mother never lets the grass grow under any of their feet, morning or night.""Do tell! it's really past belief!""So it is almost. They're teaching that girl to hammer nails, and saw, and chop, and whittle, and make boxes, and everything; as if they meant to bring her up for a carpenter; and the boy washes dishes and pares the vegetables. Even the baby has a garden of his own, and a splendid little set of tools to work with, and he's a digging and digging from morning till night.""Why, how old is he? Dear me!""They call him baby. His name is Henry; but be must be near five. Mary's ten and the boy eleven or twelve. They lost one, you know, with scarlet fever and whooping cough coming both together. He was next to Mary, and John's wife can't do too much if any of 'em are sick-that I say for her; but they never are sick, and when they are she doctors 'em all herself, for everything.""You don't mean she doctored the one that died!" cried poor old Mrs. Butts, holding up her hands in purple horror."Oh no! not that one-not after it got the fever; but they all had the whooping cough together when the baby wasn't more than three months old, and a dreadful time they had of it. Up and down she was, night after night, and they all got about over it but that one; but he was a right smart little fellow, and he got out of doors one day in a dreadful March wind in April. He was pretty much sick before, so his mother rocked him to sleep and put him in bed and the baby
was asleep too. So She went to tend to her butter-she's a master butter hand, everybody says that--and the old lady was busy and the other children at school. Pretty soon the little fellow coughed himself awake, he said, so what did he do but get up and paddled out barefooted and nothing on his head, in the wind, and go to play by himself as still as a mouse."By-and-bye she went to look if the children were all right and covered up, and little Charley wasn't there. She run out quick into the yard, and there she saw him sitting down on a plank washing little bright stones in a bit of a mud puddle close by. It had been raining, you know. She pat him straight into a tub of warm water and right into bed, and he begun to get over it again; but when the scarlet fever come it was too much for him and carried him off sudden. She couldn't help it. You needn't think that she ain't a good mother and all that-she's well enough for her own if she is nothing of a neighbor.""But Susan Bradshaw says she can scold, and she bosses every one of 'em, John and all, as if she believed the Bible said, 'The woman is the head of the man.'""Well, she is mighty curious in her ways; but up and down she was that time night and day. Most women would have died twice over, with all she did for 'em, for the fever took hold of every one, more or less, and she wouldn't ask a neighbor in to help, like other folks; but kept on all to themselves. And when Charley died she laid him out herself and dressed him all nice in his little white frock, and there he was all as nice before any one knew it. She let 'em. all come in, but she didn't seem to want any help, or any body to sit up and watch.""It looks as though she had something to hide, don't it, to keep on so unneighborly like.""So it does, but I don't think it's that; but she don't want folks spying about, that's certain.""Did she take his death hard?""Nobody knows. I'm her nearest neighbor and I never heard her speak of him except when I spoke first, and then she just answered quiet like; but she was pale as pale for a good many months after, and she followed round the children all that year with sunbonnets, and she kept them in shoes and stockings the whole Summer except just in August a while, and they generally go barefoot all the warm weather. You see I can look right into their garden patch from my upper window, and see all that's going on. So when I get all my work done and it's lonesome like, sometimes I go up and sit there."'It's as good as a play to see the whole family turn out to put up the garden sauce for the market next morning. John a-digging, and she a-cutting things,
and both children pulling and picking, and maybe the old lady looking out at times and coming to tie up bundles, and even the baby with his little pail picking currants or berries or something. But don't you go and tell that, Mrs. Butts. I never tell any of the neighbors round here that I see 'em; for I don't think she would like it and she's a sharp tongue in her head for cutting in a soft place if you have one, for all she speaks so nicely and quiet like most times. So don't you speak about that upper window while you stay visiting here in town. If you do you are no friend of mine; but I've always trusted you since we were girls together.""So you may still, Sally, for I won't tell. But you think she'll bring her girl up for the market?""Can't tell.""Jane Bradshaw says she joined the church before she was married, and John too, at the same time.""Yes, and she teaches the children Sundays like a parson, and she always keeps 'em in school, Winter and Summer, and the whole family go to meeting rain or shine, as regular as the minister himself. They sit in one of the best pews and pay for it too, and everybody says they are getting rich hand over hand. Everybody knows they are close-fisted for all that.""What kind of clothes do they wear mostly at meeting?""Nothing to speak of; just comfortable and that's all. And as for eating, oh my! They say she hires her children not to taste nice things for six months together, and won't eat them herself to set 'em an example, and then she gets 'em new books instead. But nobody knows for certain unless it's the hired men, and she puts them at a separate table with good plain farmers' fare and enough of it; but if there's any nice sauce or such she puts on a little bit herself, and don't trust it to them. She waits on 'em herself mostly; and she goes herself and gets green hands, generally right out of Castle Garden, and she helps to train 'em to work.""I've seen her many a time showing one just how to hold a new fangled plow between the rows, going round and round herself, and then making the man go on holding it, she following on beside him. John, he'd try first, maybe, and give it up in despair it appeared to me; and when she come from market then she would do it all over and the man had to learn, if he was ever so green. I generally keep an eye over every new man that comes, it's so curious. And most of 'em like her and won't say nothing against her if they know it. Old John Stokes says she's tougher than a boiled owl, and it's my belief she's just made of steel springs. She goes on as if she was just wound up fresh every morning and
had to run till night without stopping. John, he's got to be a worker, I tell you, but he's nothing to her!""She's just made for it, must be!" mused the visitor. "I never heard anything so curious. I'd like to go and see her so as to tell the folks when I get home. Couldn't we go over to tea, neighborly like. I used to know the old lady, you know, but we never were much friends after all.""I don't know. I haven't been there to tea in six years. Nobody goes, only just to call and chat with old Mrs. Reband, and she comes in and sits awhile but never stops. The children are always wanting her she says, and they are all so busy. They must take care of their business, she says. I kept on going to tea there, two or three times, once in a year or two, and then I stopped going.""Do tell! didn't they treat you civil?""Oh, yes! civil enough, and got the nicest supper you ever see, and the old lady sat and talked and talked; but she went on working and working and only put on her clean dress just before supper. She treats everybody just so and never returns the visit, and now nobody goes there to take tea. She's as civil spoken as can be, you know, and once in awhile they invite a few neighbors in the Winter, thinking that will make up, I suppose.""Well, I'd like to go over and try it for once, if you didn't mind. I can't be here in the Winter, you know, and likely shouldn't get invited if I was.""I'll declare I should like it, Mrs. Butts; but I'm most afraid to venture.""Yes, do now! we'll stand by each other, and Jane Bradshaw would go with us and welcome. I'll run over and get her this minute, if you'll go too. Yes, you will, of course, and I'm going to try it."Away went the little woman. She was a visitor from out West who had formerly lived in the vicinity and had no idea of returning home without seeing the marvel of the neighborhood at her own fireside. "Wouldn't miss it for anything," was her mental comment, "somebody's got to go with me, for I can't try it alone."Antoinette Brown BlackwellSN0W-FLAKES Mary SquiresI have no new thoughts to offer,Nothing that's new to write,Of the white winged flakes that flutterOn the frosty air of night.I only know that In silenceThe busy workers creep;And clothe with wonderful beautyThe world that's fast asleep.In robes of the rarest whitenessThey wrap up the Summer's flowers;And muffle the clocks in the steeples,To keep them from telling the hours.How I wish that the fairy wonders,Would muffle the clocks so well,Not a sound could come from their brazen throatsThe passing hours to tell.That Father Time in his journeyThey would "block" in a drift of snow;Till we snatched back the youth and the pleasures,He took from us long ago.0, idle the wish of the moment, A moment of longing and pain: I am standing alone in the doorwayWatching the snow-flakes again.Watching them falling and falling,Till I stretch my hand into the night And capture one of the fairies,And carry it into the light.I gaze on the crystalline wonder,So dainty and white in its fear;But scarcely I've noted its beautyEre it's melted away to a tear.So it is with our heart's dearest treasures,We hold them, and lo, they are gone;And we've nothing but tears to remind us,That ever we called them our own.But I'm trying to talk of the snow-flakes,And not of life's losses and care;Trying to tell of the weavers;And their magical loom in the air.Ah, would that our web were as spotless,That the fabric we weave were as grand,That somebody's heart would be lighter,By work we had plotted and planned.That the sad, and the weak, and the weary,Could be shielded from censure and frown,As the snow fairies cover earth's bleaknessWith mantles of ermine and down.But I must go on with my story--And tell how the weavers to-nightHave covered the gardens and gateways,And festooned the trees all in white.How over the grave on the hillsideThey fashioned a beautiful wreath, 0, whiter by far than the marbleThat guarded the sleeper beneath.How the lightning-rods tickled their fancy,And they dressed them so white, and so gay,0 that the thunder king never'd a known them,Had he chanced to have been passing that way.O, the beautiful, beautiful weavers,How they'll sparkle and laugh with fun, When they see in to-morrow's sunlight,The wonderful work they have done.But it's nothing new that I've told you, Of the white-winged snow to-night; Nothing that's new of the weavers;Of the mantles soft and white.MARY SQUIRES.CARRYING HODS.M.F. BurlingameA PULPIT orator recently sought to inform women what they might do. They could attend to domestic duties, engage in the employments usually conceded to be feminine, teach, and practice the healing art to some extent; but entering every department of labor was not to be thought of.  Indeed, he did not think a woman would look very charmingly carrying a hod of bricks to the top of a three-story building.A number of men assume to be competent to instruct women as to what they should do and should not do. Horace Greeley sits in his sanctum and says to woman, You ought to labor so and so. Of course he has a right to his opinion, but women no longer answer, " Unargued I obey." Rev. Horace Bushnell calls a woman's right to choose her occupation "A Reform against Nature." I suppose it is according to nature for man to do as he pleases, and for woman to do as man bids her!Woman, poor, weak, inefficient creature that she is, does not know what she can do, but all-wise man looking down from his pedestal of superiority can tell her. He knows her capabilities better than she does herself. Claiming the whole universe himself, for there is not a province of woman, excepting the duties of motherhood, which some man has not invaded, he restricts woman to what he thinks is proper.Would men ever cease laughing if Phebe A. Hanaford should gravely assert in the pulpit "that man could engage in certain occupations with propriety, but in her opinion he would not look very dignified washing dishes or embroidering a baby's sack? Would not men open their eyes if E. Cady Stanton should object to men engaging in politics, and say that she preferred that they should be men such as Milton portrayed in Adam? There is a great deal of truth in the homely old saying, "what is sauce for the goose," etc.
If women should be restricted, why not men also? If men have the whole range of professions and occupations to choose from, why not women the same? I have seen men wash dishes, cook, mix bread, sweep, wash, iron, sew, rock the cradle, and dress babies; and though looking sharp for evidences of demoralization, I failed to see them. I do not believe those men lost any of their virtue or manhood, because they performed "women's work" from choice or necessity. If a man is not demoralized by doing "women's work," why should a woman be demoralized by doing "men's work," even to plowing and carrying a hod?She is not. Facts are irresistible. I have seen women spade, hoe, rake and pitch hay, saw and split wood, drive nails, and plane, and their morals were not corrupted. Some of them were not strong enough pbysically for such labors, but they were conscientious helpmeets, or had no "natural protectors," or else those "indispensibles" were lazy and had to be supported. The fact is, neither men nor women are fully educated until they know enough of culinary arts to keep from starving; enough of sewing to draw a rent together or fasten a button; enough of agriculture to dig for potatoes, and not mistake flower bulbs for onions; and enough of zoology to select the proper animals for milking, in case of exigencies. No woman is properly prepared for life until she is capable of existing without having a man to wait upon her, and no man is properly prepared for life until he can exist without a woman to wait upon him. Digest that, you men who prate of' domestic duties as woman's only sphere.Is man the keeper of a woman's virtue and morality, that he should decide where she should go and what she should do? Shall she defer her judgment to his? Where is the evidence that men are more wise, more moral, more virtuous, and nearer perfect than women? Who do the greater amount of drinking, swearing, thieving and murdering, men or women? Women are bad enough, but wherein are men so much better that they should dictate to women?In every phase of the woman question, this shallow objection arises: Women are better than men because their sphere is more limited, because they are not beset with the temptations which assail men, hence we would keep them thus. Give them the privileges of men, even in labor alone, and they will become as low as men, and if men have not
something to look up to, they will fall yet lower. There is sophistry somewhere when men pretend to "look up" to women, to reverence them, and yet command them as though they were children or idiots.Shut up a child in an isolated tower, and keep from her all knowledge of evil, and when she reaches womanhood, men can look up to her as an innocent woman but not as a virtuous one-"InnocenceYou'll find it in the cradle-nowhere else-Save in your dreams, among the grown up babesThat dwelt in Eden--powerless, pulpy soulsThat showed a dimple for each touch of sinGod seeks for virtue, and that it may live,It must resist, and that which it resistsMust live."is a sad, sad acknowledgment for men, and a poor compliment to women, when a man intimates that the sexes cannot become fellow workers without moral degradation attending. Is there so much latent wickedness and sensuality in woman, that giving her the right to labor as she chooses, will plunge her into vile excesses?A similar objection was raised against the cause that the editor of the Tribune so nobly advocated, the emancipation of the Negroes. There were many people in the North who really wished good to the Negroes, but trembled for fear that giving them personal liberty, and the right to the fruits of their labors, to say nothing of suffrage, would result in a horrible degradation, amalgamation. Have seven years of experience verified the fear? Have Caucasians rushed into alliance with Africans? Do the teething portion of our population give evidence that the Anglo-Saxon race is becoming obliterated?Wherever men and women labor as equals, subject to the same regulations, and enjoy the same privileges, moral degradation will not follow. The success of the mixed school system is sufficient to prove that. The false restrictions imposed upon woman are degrading. Remove the fair, deceitful mask of society where man is master and woman is slave, and we see a hideous skeleton. Nothing can be worse than the cruel, debasing extremities to which women are driven by injustice, the legalized wrongs they are compelled to endure, and the abnormal tendencies to vice perpetuated from generation to generation through woman's degraded condition.Moreover, because women claim the right of choosing their occupations, even to carry hods, does not prove they will seek an Injurious, promiscuous mingling of the sexes in departments of labor. Strange, if more knowledge and liberty are to destroy woman's discretion and sense of propriety. Virtuous men and women shrink from the companionship of the vile, and that law of nature will not be reversed.Further, the practical acknowledgment of women as human beings not as creatures to be cajoled, supported, defrauded, and commanded, will tend to create a manhood and womanhood that can look upon each other without committing "adultery in the heart."The gracefulness of a woman's occupation is none of man's business."Let every honest calling be as proper For woman as for man; throw open all Varieties of labor, skilled or rough, To woman's choice and woman's competition. Let her decide the question of the fitness, Let her rake hay, or pitch it, if she'd rather Do that than scrub a floor, or wash, or iron."Some men seem to have a chronic fear that women will make one grand rush and leave every domestic department vacant. Do men leave masculine employments and rush into feminine ones? Neither will women leave feminine employments for masculine ones, save where they are overcrowded or underpaid. Women have to eat and wear clothes a a well as men, and they will see that the cooking and sewing are done, and that, too, without commanding men to do or not to do them.Neither do women seek to monopolize any profession or occupation. What we want is that every individual, male or female, should have free access to every department of labor, and be remunerated according to the quantity and quality of labor performed.Then, if a man thinks he is fulfilling his destiny by donning an apron and washing dishes for a living, in the name of justice let him do so, without sneers or complaints, and pay him the same you would a woman.And if a woman thinks her mission is to carry a hod of bricks to the top of a three-story building, let her do it in peace, and pay her what you would a man for the same amount of labor, without troubling yourself as to whether or not she looks as graceful as she would making shirts at ten cents a piece. She is probably as good a judge of her capacities and business affairs as you are. M.F. BurlingameTHROWN UPON THE WORLD.PART FIFTH.It was Anniversary week of the year 186- in New York. The growing interest in reformatory questions, more than compensating for the decline in the old-time religious anniversaries, has brought more than the usual influx of strangers to the metropolis, imparting to it that bizarre appearance established as a feature of the well-known season.In the year that has elapsed since the parting of Marian and De L'Estrange many changes have taken place directly effecting the fortunes of our heroine. The Universe which, in an hour of dire necessity, had employed, with excellent results, girl compositors, who saved its issues and its honor when both were at the mercy of an arrogant organization, listened, after the danger was passed, to the unworthy counsels of its Board of Directors, who, heeding the clamors of a disaffected constituency, gave orders that there should be a general dismissal of the women compositors employed on The Universe. Nor was this all. Not only with a characteristic want of spirit did they listen to this ignominious proposal and restore the "strikers," but the depth of baseness was reached by the manner in which the discharge of their women employes was effected. After accepting their services when else complete disgrace, if not destruction, would have befallen them; after owing to their faithful, conscientious service months of satisfactory publication, their peremptory discharge was accompanied, as a cloak to the baseness of the action, by slanderous statements, editorially and otherwise given to the public, to the effect that their employment of women compositors had proven a failure, and that it was owing to woman's unfitness to master the trade of type-setting, and not from any other reason that the change was made. All the indignation of Marian's nature was aroused by this act of injustice. Although herself tendered by the proprietors another and, in many respects, a preferable situation, to the one which she filled, she unhesitatingly refused to make any terms with the traducers of her sister workers, and at once sought
the sanctum of the editor-in-chief, in whose ear she poured an eloquent account of the grievous wrong done herself and her companions."For myself I care not," she said, "but the poor girls for whom I plead, what have they done to be treated thus unjustly? When to accept a situation in your office was to make themselves the objects of animadversion and dislike, the butt and target of a powerful association when to walk the streets, in the daily journeying to and fro, was to run the gauntlet of a bitter, relentless persecution, these girls came at your invitation, toiling faithfully at untried task and saving from scorn the reputation of your journal when it went grovellng at the feet of an organization that had no regard or mercy for you. And what is their reward for all this! After saving you from dishonor; after familiarizing themselves with their new duties and rendering, as I know, essential satisfaction, you turn them, as it were, upon the street, taking away from them even their good name, and restoring to favor the very men who conspired against you and who have visited upon us such indignity. Ah, Mr. Danton, I fear you have done an ill work, one for which there can be no full atonement."Charmed by the frank audacity of her manner, the editor remained silent during the delivery of Marian's impassioned address, and when half breathless she concluded, he replied, a look of mingled care and compassion creeping into his grave, thought-lined face as he spoke:"My dear young lady, you little know how powerless we journalists frequently are even to act out what our own judgment dictates to us as wise or fitting to do. The outer world may call my articles brilliant and envy me my position, but did it know that, with every metropolitan journal, behind the seeming throne there lurked unseen, in some one, of its protean shapes, a power far more potent, guiding and determining all, and that he who sat in the editorial chair, with all his insignia of authority, was oft but the poor puppet to execute its behest,-it would a little abate in its admiration of his position. To undo what has been done I am powerless, were it all as you have stated. But I am touched, deeply touched by your representations. Now that my attention is called to the matter, it shall be investigated, and if it be all as you say, which I doubt not, depend upon it, my dear young lady, there shall be
no more slanders upon you in The Universe while Robert Danton has part or voice in its management."And so Marian turned her back upon her first place of employment in New York. But she was not destined to be idle. Learning of her freedom from engagement, the proprietor of a flourishing weekly journal, radical in character, to whom she was known by reputation, sought her out, and eagerly proposed to her to assume the charge of his composing room, offering to invest her with full power to employ compositors from her own sex, and to introduce such regulations as she desired in the management of the office. This was what Marian had long ardently desired. Hers was an eminently practical mind, and in her long apprenticeship to type at the office of The Universe she had had excellent opportunities to familiarize herself with every department of the business, and to form, mentally, plans for the improvement of printing offices, and for the amelioration of the condition of toiling compositors, which she resolved, should she ever have control of a composing room, she would endeavor to put in practice. This offer of Mr. Lyman's, coming at this juncture, seemed to her a providential opening of the way, and it was at once thankfully accepted. From among the girls discharged from The Universe and yet seeking employment, she selected those in whom she had the greatest confidence, including, of course, in the half-dozen chosen, her valued friend, Lizzie Fay, who had been almost inconsolable during the few intervening days at the thought of being separated from her companion. Selecting thus and disciplining her forces, she entered with confidence upon her new duties, in the discharge of which she succeeded beyond her most sanguine expectations, eliciting the warmest approbation of her employer, good Mr. Lyman, and, by the novelty of a forewoman, attracting to the office scores of newspaper men and skeptical masculine compositors, who among themselves ridiculed the idea of a woman's ability, unaided, to get out a first-class metropolitan journal. Among those who more frequently, but not as a skeptic, dropped into the pleasant, airy composing room, to note progress and chat with the presiding genius of the establishment, was her old friend of The Universe, Mr. Jobson. Grown more gouty and testy than ever to others, the hobbling proof-reader had ever a kindly word and smile for Marian, in whose ability even to edit a lexicon or an ency-
clopedia he had the most unbounded confidence. Scarcely a week elapsed but what his well-known, halting tread could be heard approaching teh work-room, and whenever he came, adroitly brought at some time into the conversation, there would be some item or bit of fresh intelligence to communicate concerning "our boy over the water."And may it be asked by the reader, interested in the slender thread of romance running through these pages, how all this time the interest, so auspiciously commenced, continued between the absent De L'Estrange and our heroine? There was no direct intercourse, and neither was aware that for the other there were entertained sentiments beyond those of esteem or kindly remembrance. But the passion which had taken such sudden possession of De L'Estrange no excitement of travel or continued absence had power to lessen; and amid the Capitals of the Continent, the brilliant, festive scenes in which, over and over, he mingled in his "on the wing'" wanderings, his memory ran back to a faraway composing room, and the image of a slender girl bending over the "case," or flitting from place to place in the discharge of her varied duties, was a picture more dearly treasured than any the fairest scene or the smile of the courtliest dame could afford. And Marian--how was it with our busy, active Marian? Not to herself would she confess her growing interest in the light-hearted correspondent, with whose movements, through garrulous Mr. Jobson, she was kept so conversant; but in her room, when the day was done, she would take his latest letter to The Universe, --always so bright, investing the tritest theme with interest,--and, poring over it, muse upon the higher tone of his correspondence and marvel if indeed their acquaintance, so slight, so all like a dream to her now, was the cause of the change ? His tour, which at first was supposed would be confined to Europe, had broadened out with the exigencies of correspondence, and a large portion of the East, hurriedly visited, was also embraced in the year of almost continuous wanderings. His letters, descriptive often of scenes and places imperfectly known to the American public, by their piquancy had arrested the attention of a prominent publishing house, who had made a flattering proposition to bring them out in a volume, to which arrangement De L'Estrange had assented, and the latest intelligence which had reached Marian was that, his mission abroad about accomplished, to look after home interests,
he was expected. to sail for New York by the next steamer from Havre.So time wore away, and Anniversary week, looked forward to by Marian and her companion with interest, as the occasion when they would hear "silvern speech," by some of the rarest minds in America, arrived. The friends inaugurated their round of evening pleasures by their attendance at the magnificent "O'Connell" lecture by Wendell Phillips, delivered at the Academy of Music. Going early to procure good seats, they enjoyed seeing the gathering of the fashionable  assemblage, the culture and wealth of New York paying spontaneous tribute to eloquent lips and to a theme endeared to the public. To Marian the appearance and manner of the great apostle of freedom was familiar, but to Lizzie, in person, he was all unknown, and, in the intensity of interest born of familiarity with his impassioned oratory, she almost breathlessly awaited the appearance of the speaker. It was a brilliant assemblage upon which the girls gazed. Tier upon tier, from the parquette to the galleries was a sea of faces, and the flood of light from the thousand burners fell upon one of the fairest audiences ever congregated to listen to a discourse in the Empire City. Suddenly there was a lull in the buzz that ran round among the thousands; then a burst of hearty applause succeeded, as a tall, well-known figure walked across the stage and took his seat amid the few gentlemen gathered upon the platform. Scarcely time had Lizzie to whisper to her companion, "How like his photograph he looks," when the hurried introduction was made, and a yet heartier burst of applause greeted the speaker who had advanced to the front of the stage and stood waiting for quiet to be restored ere he opened his lips. Perhaps in the wide range of Lyceum themes treated by Wendell Phillips there is no lecture which so well displays his varied charm of oratory as the portrayal of Ireland's wrongs in the "O'Connell" lecture, and to those who have bowed beneath its spell, I need not attempt to describe its effect upon an audience. That night in the brilliantly lighted Academy there were butterflies of fashion, worldly-minded men and women, cold, critical scholars and savanssavants, rude, illiterate Celts, attracted by the announcement of a lecture upon their "Great Countryman;" but upon all the effect was not unlike. Entranced by the wondrous fascination of the speaker's words, the great audience sat all unmindful of the lapse
of time, until the closing sentence was pronounced, when, as waking from a spell, it rose and bore in its engulphing tide our friends out into the air of the clear May night.DEATH.William P. TomlinsonIn the silent keeping Of futurity,Waits like watchful warder Solemn day for me. I may roam earth over, I May sail the sea,Yet awaits the comingOf that day for me. Whether stealthily creeping In the curtained room, Where loved ones a-weepingWatch amid its gloom, Or, in time unthought Deals the sudden blowOn the land or ocean, Death must come, I know. Grant, 0, All-Wise Father,In infinityOf thy love and mercy, But this boon to me: Naught I care for season, Earthly spot or place, But the blessed assurance I may see Thy Face!William P. TomlinsonSEVERAL ABSURDITIES CONSIDERED.Jane O. DeForestNo class of persons has ever needed to "possess their souls with -patience," more than that of Reformers in general, and Woman Suffrageites in particular. When we bear knowing school-boys declaiming against the Woman Question, we feel a sort of pitying contempt for their wise ignorance; but when people of maturer years and supposed good sense present such ridiculous reasons why women should not receive the ballot, it takes a good deal of control to prevent, at least, a look of disgust from shadowing our countenance.Not long ago we heard a young man, who certainly did not lack for height of body, if he did for breadth of mind, remark, that lie "didn't believe in women getting out of their sphere; their places were at home,
and besides they were not well enough educated to vote." Out of their sphere, if they should deposit a slip of paper in a ballot-box a few times a year? To be sure, what would become of the buttons and stockings, not to mention the babies and bread, if our countrywomen should undertake such onerous duties. Nearly as much time would be consumed as in their yearly selection of new hats and bonnets. We really wonder how it is that the merchants, students and mechanics, manage to leave their spheres long enough to vote. Do they find everything at "sixes and sevens," when they return?Have not sufficient education to vote! Who, we would ask, compose, to-day, the greater part of our vast army of educators? Who, indeed, but intelligent and educated ladies. Such an assertion, then, is an insult to our sex; and any one who would seriously make such a remark, exhibits an inferior mental capacity which should forever debar him from the rights of citizenship. One "newspaper" man objects because, if women vote, they will also have to hold office. He says, "How ridiculous it would seem, for instance, to have it announced that court would be adjourned, so that the judge could attend to her baby." Poor fellow! If he had been through college, and is an editor, we think he still lacks a little good common sense, or he never would have penned so absurd an objection. We have known of men, who for less consideration than the emoluments of office, have left their families to care for themselves as best they might; but no one but a simpleton would for a moment suppose that any sensible woman would stifle the mother love in her heart, and neglect her children, to accept of any office in the gift of the people. If our Mrs. Livermores or Miss Dickinsons who have no "little folks" to hinder them, choose in course of time to accept the suffrage of the nation, well and good. That they will never disgrace their constituency by drunken carousals and unblushing bribery, we are absolutely certain."These Women's Rights women want to unsex themselves, they wish to be men," vehemently asserts some woman objector. Not a bit of it, my dear lady, so smoothe your ruffled plumes. We never did fancy masculine women, and when you get into one of your loud, denunciatory tirades against Woman Suffrage, we feel thankful that we are not obliged to listen to the "Caudle lectures," so frequently administered to your poor husband. "They want to wear the pants," said a student in his
essay; but he felt rather subdued, we fancy, when a fellow student replied, "I don't believe any woman wishes to wear Mr. E----'s unmentionables." "I should like to see those women obliged to stand up all of the way in a long journey on the cars," said a woman with inconsiderate vengeance. Cruel, wasn't she? Now we should be very sorry to see a man with his "Hercules frame, and Jupiter voice," obliged to perform such an act of penance for his various misdeeds. We should not even have the heart to see our friend, Dr. Bushnell, undergoing such an ordeal, and think that, unlike so many of our opposing sisters, we should quietly remove our band-box, and offer "The Thunderer"a seat by our side."I have all the rights I want," simpers a wasp-waisted damsel. Certainly, my dear, and so you have. It is about as much as you can do to breathe; of course you cannot attend to the "weightier matters of the law," but that is no reason why women of sense, with both breadth of chest and intellect, should be deprived of their rights. [We advise all young men of the opposition, to seek the society of the "wasp-waisted," and they will seldom be troubled by feminine strong-mindedness.]"I pay heavy taxes, but I have no representation," said a wealthy and talented young lady. "Why don't she got somebody to represent her, then?" remarked a young man with a laugh, meaning, of course, "Why does she not secure that highly-prized article, a husband."What profound philosophy! What an unrivalled panacea for all of her present disabilities--proxy representation. We wonder why the good women do not ask their husbands to unite with the churches in their places. It would be as reasonable and just, though we fear often not so agreeable to the feelings of their "representatives."The "opposition" must urge less ridiculous reasons against our glorious reform, if they do not wish to find themselves, presently, covered with shame and confusion. The beautiful banner of Universal Freedom and Suffrage is gaily waving beneath the blue dome of Heaven, but the flaunting eschutcheons of the enemy have been so terribly shattered by the shot and shell from our ranks, that we now see only a few unsightly tatters dolefully flapping in the breeze. Their leading standard bearers have fallen ingloriously, but as an act of humanity let us give them a Christian burial. In one wide grave, let us humanely place the remains
of our Fultons, Todds, Hatfields and Bushnells, with other "smaller fry," and let them sleep on peacefully.Jane O. DeForest.THE AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION.THE CLEVELAND WOMAN'S RIGHTS CONVENTION.THE most important Convention in the interest of Woman Suffrage, thus far held in the country, was that which, agreeably to a widely-signed Call, convened at Cleveland, Ohio, on the 24th and 25th of November, 1869. Grand in purpose, sanctioned by a magnificent array of representative names, guided in deliberations by some of the finest of liberal minds, men and women, the Cleveland Convention, which, in the language of A. BRONSON ALCOTT, was to be "the initiation of one of the grandest of human organizations," was, in all its stages, a success highly gratifying to the tireless minds that called it forth and watched with solicitude the proceedings, and to every friend of Woman Suffrage throughout the Nation.In all twenty-one States were represented. Delegates were present from almost every part of the Union, making the Convention truly representative in character, while in weight of names, and in harmony of action, the movement could scarcely have been more worthily presented to the public. Among the delegates were LUCY STONE, JULIA WARD HOWE, MARY A. LIVERMORE, T. W. HIGGINSON, ANTOINETTE BROWN BLACKWELL, CAROLINE M. SEVERANCE, A. BRONSON ALCOTT, MARY F DAVIS, HENRY B. BLACKWELL, and many others whose names and presence lent luster and dignity to the Convention. Letters were read from GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS, FRANCES D. GAGE, WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON and other well-known advocates of the cause.After the reading, by LUCY STONE, of the original circular letter which constituted the basis of the call for the Convention, a temporary organization was effected by the selection of Judge JAMES B. BRADWELL of Illinois as Chairman, and MARY F. DAVIS of New Jersey as Secretary.A permanent organization was effected as follows:
President.-T. W. Higginson, of Rhode Island.Vice-Presidents.--Hon. Nathaniel White of New Hampshire; Caroline M. Severance, of Massachusetts; Anna C. Field, of New -York; Rev. Antoinette Brown Blackwell, of New Jersey; John K. Wildman, of Pennsylvania; Dr. John Cameron, of Delaware; Rev. Charles H. Marshall, of Indiana; Hon. J. B. Bradwell, of Illinois; Rev. H. K. McConnell, of Ohio; Mrs. A. L. Ballou, of Minnesota; Miss Lilly Peckham, of Wisconsin; Mrs. Dr. J. H. Jones, of Michigan; Mrs. Adda Fiella, of Mississippi; Mrs. Jennie B. Ritter, of California; Capt. Judson M. Cross, of Iowa; Henry F. Campbell, of Florida.Secretairies.--Mrs. Myra Bradwell, of Illinois; Mary F. Davis, of New Jersey.Treasurer.--William N. Hudson, of Ohio.In taking the chair Mr. HIGGINSON made a neat and appropriate address, expressing his thanks for the compliment in selecting him as presiding officer of the Convention, and declaring his cordial sympathy in the movement for woman suffrage. "The object," he remarked, "is not one of compulsion but freedom--to lay before woman this great responsibility, and to say to her, choose if you please; vote or not. All that we have to do is to break down the barrier that now excludes her."During the first day interesting addresses were delivered by LUCY STONE, JULIA WARD HOWE, MRS.. TRACY CUTLER, REV. PHEBE A. HANAFORD, MRS. C. M. SEVERANCE, MARY A. LIVERMORE, F. B. SANBORN, and other delegates. The afternoon session was quite numerously attended, and in the evening, the fine hall in which the Convention held its sittings, was densely packed with a cultured, appreciative audience. From Mrs. HANAFORD'S fine poem, given at the conclusion of her address, we select the following stanzas:"When woman in the state, beside her brother,May nobly toil,This land shall take a place o'er every other, And on its soilThe grandest temple ever reared to freedomIn peace shall rise;Its tower of strength--the truth that all are equal, Beneath the skies.And as no bond nor free are known among us, Since Lincoln wrote,So neither male nor female shall be counted, When freemen vote."At the morning session of the second day, the Constitution for the new Association was presented, which, after a discussion of a pleasant character, was adopted in a form not materially different from the original draft. It read as follows:CONSTITUTION OF THE AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION.PREAMBLE: The undersigned friends of Woman Suffrage, assembled in delegate convention in Cleveland, Ohio, November 24th and 25th, 1869, in response to a call widely signed and after a public notice duly given, believing that a truly representative national organization is needed for the orderly and efficient prosecution of the woman suffrage movement in America, which shall embody the deliberate action of the State and local organizations and shall carry with it their united weight, do hereby form the American Woman Suffrage Association.ARTICLE I.NAME: This association shall be known as the American Woman Suffrage Association.ARTICLE II.OBJECT: Its object shall be to concentrate the efforts of all the advocates of woman suffrage in the United States for national purposes only; viz.:SECTION 1. To form auxiliary State associations in every State where none such now exist, and to cooperate with those already existing, which shall declare themselves auxiliary before the first day of March next, the authority of the auxiliary societies being recognized in their respective localities and their plans being promoted by every means in our power.SEC. 2. To hold an annual meeting of delegates for the transaction of business and the election of officers for the ensuing year; also one or more national conventions for the advocacy of woman suffrage.SEC. 3. To publish tracts, documents and other printed matter for the supply of State and local societies and individuals at actual cost.SEC. 4. To prepare and circulate petitions to State and territorial legislatures, to Congress, or to Constitutional conventions in behalf of the legal and political equality of women; to employ lecturers and agents; and to take any measures the executive committee may think fit, to forward the objects of the association.ARTICLE III.ORGANIZATION: SEC. 1. The officers of this association shall be a president, eight vice-presidents at large, chairman of the executive committee, foreign corresponding secretary, corresponding secretary, two recording secretaries and a treasurer, all of whom shall be ex-officio members of the executive committee;
also, one vice-president and one member of the executive committee from each State and territory and from the District of Columbia, as afterward provided.SEC. 2. Every president of an auxiliary State and territorial society shall be exofficio a vice-president of this association.SEC. 3 Every chairman of the executive committee of an auxiliary State society shall be ex-officio a member of the executive committee of this association.SEC. 4. In cases where no auxiliary State society exists, a suitable person may be selected by the annual meeting or by the executive committee as vice-president, or member of the executive committee from said State, to serve only until the organization of said State association.SEC. 5. The executive committee may fill all vacancies that may occur prior to the next annual meeting.SEC. 6. All officers shall be elected annually at an annual meeting of delegates, on the basis of the congressional representation of the respective States and territories, except as above provided.SEC. 7. No distinction on account of sex shall ever he made in the membership or in the election of officers of this society.SEC. 8. No money shall be paid by the treasurer except under such restrictions as the executive committee may provide.SEC. 9. Five members of the executive committee, when convened by the chairman, after fifteen days written notice previously mailed to each of its members, shall constitute a quorum. But no action thus taken shall be final, until such proceedings shall have been ratified in writing by at least fifteen members of the committee.SEC. 10. The chairman shall convene a meeting whenever requested to do so by five members of the executive committee.ARTICLE IV.The association shall have a branch office in every State and territory in connection with the office of the auxiliary State society therein, and shall have a central office at such place as the executive committee may determine.ARTICLE V.This constitution may be amended at any annual meeting by a vote of three-fifths of the delegates present therein.ADDITIONAL CLAUSES.Any person may become a member of the American Woman's Association by signing the constitution and paying the sum of $1 annually; or a life member by paying the sum of $10, which shall entitle them to attend the business meetings of delegates and participate in their deliberations.Honorary members may be appointed by the annual meeting, or by the executive committee in consideration of services rendered.At the afternoon session the Report of the Committee on Organization was presented and adopted, comprising the following list of officers:OFFICERS.President.--Henry Ward Beecher.Vice-Presidents at large.--T. W. Higginson, Mary A. Livermore, William Lloyd Garrison, Mrs. W. T. Hazard, George William Curtis, Celia M. Burleigh, George W. Julian, Margaret V. Longley.Chairman of Executive Committee.--Lucy Stone.Foreign Corresponding Secretary.--Julia Ward Howe.Corresponding Secretary.--Myra Bradwell.Recording Secretaries.--Henry B. Blackwell, Amanda Way.Treasurer. --Frank B. Sanborn.Vice- Presidents. --Maine, Rev. Amory Battles; New Hampshire, Armenia S. White; Vermont, Hon. C. W. Willard; Massachusetts, Caroline M. Severance, Rhode Island, Rowland G. Hazard; Connecticut, Seth Rogers; New York, Oliver Johnson; New Jersey, Antoinette Brown Blackwell; Pennsylvania, Robert Purvis; Delaware, Mrs. Hanson Robinson; Ohio, Mrs. Tracy Cutler; Indiana, Lizzie M. Boynton; Illinois, Hon. C. B. Waite; Wisconsin, Rev. H. Eddy; Michigan, Moses Coit Tyler; Minnesota, Mrs. A. Knight; Kansas, Charles Robinson; Iowa, Amelia Bloomer; Missouri, Isaac H. Sturgeon; Tennessee, Hon. Guy W. Wines; Florida, Alfred Purdie, Oregon, Mrs. Gen. Rufus Saxton; California, Rev. Charles G. Ames; Virginia, Hon. J. C. Underwood; Washington Territory, Hon. Rufus Leighton; Arizona, A. K. P. Safford.Executive Committee. --Main e, Mrs. Oliver Dennett; New Hampshire, Hon. Nathaniel White; Vermont, Mrs. James Hutchinson, Jr.; Massachusetts; Rev. Rowland Connor; Rhode Island, Elizabeth B. Chace; Connecticut, Rev. Olympia Brown; New York, Mrs. Theodore Tilton; New Jersey, Mary F. Davis; Pennsylvania, Mary Grew; Delaware, Dr. John Cameron; Ohio, A. J. Boyer; Indiana, Rev. Charles Marshall; Illinois, Hon. J. B. Bradwell; Wisconsin, Lilly Peckham; Michigan, Lucinda H. Stone; Minnesota., Abby J. Spaulding; Kansas, Mrs. C. I. H. Nichols; Iowa, Belle Mansfield; Missouri, Mrs. Frances Minor; Tennessee, Rev. Charles J. Woodbury; Florida, Mrs. Dr. Hawkes; California., Miss Mary Ames; Virginia, Hon. A. M. Fretz; District Columbia, Grace Greenwood.From letters read during different sessions of the Convention, the following extracts are presented:LETTER FROM GEORGE WILLIAM CURTIS.The position of women now is undoubtedly higher in America than it has ever been anywhere; and in all civilized States, the theory that women are properly a subject sex is sharply questioned. But wherever the improvement of their condition is most marked, the more general and imperative is their demand for political equality. Nor should this surprise us; for compliment and courtesy to women, the most rapturous flattery and the loudest professions of tender regard for feminine delicacy, are found to be compatible with unjust and contemptuous laws concerning them. Liberty is the child of justice, and if the voters of the United States believe that governments justly exist by the consent of the governed, let them say whether half the adult population of the country whose interest in the commonwealth is us vital as that of the other half; who are as intelligent, as moral, as orderly; who own property; who pay taxes; who in every way contribute to the general welfare, shall continue to be disfranchised with criminals, idiots and the insane; or whether every opportunity which men themselves enjoy shall not be opened by them to the equally free choice of women.I send the heartiest God-speed to your labors and your words. The cause is but part of the general emancipation of society from the fetters of ancient injustice and impolicy. And success is sure; for America, in blood and fire upon a hundred fields, as in the firm heart and hope of her best children, is consecrated to Liberty.Very truly yours,GEORGE WILLIAM CURTISLETTER FROM FRANCES D. GAGE.To the American Woman's Suffrage AssociationFrom the invalid's chamber and the cripple's chair I send you my most earnest "God speed" in your humanitarian work.Many that will stand upon the platform in Cleveland, November 24th, stood on the platform of the National Woman's Rights convention in the same city sixteen years ago.Looking back from the standpoint of American opinion to-day to that time, and comparing the "then". and the "now," can you not feel that the victory is almost won?If God and nature have decreed from the beginning that man and woman shall not stand as equals in all that appertains to the highest development of the human race, then is our civilization a mockery, and our Christianity a failure.FRANCES D. GAGE.
70 Willow street, Brooklyn, N. Y.LETTER FROM WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON.The suffrage is the turning point of women's cause; it alone will insure to them an equal hearing and fair play. With it, they cannot long be denied any just right, or excluded from any fair advantage; without it, their interests and failings will always be a secondary consideration, and it will be thought of little consequence how much their sphere is circumscribed, or how many modes of using their faculties are denied to them.WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON.At the closing session, on the evening of the second day, the audience was larger than on any previous occasion. All parts of the hall, to the aisles and stairways, were crowded with eager, attentive listeners. The work of the Convention had been completed, and the evening was devoted to speaking. Among those who spoke were JULIA WARD HOWE, LUCY STONE, HENRY B. BLACKWELL, CELIA BURLEIGH, CAROLINE M. SEVERANCE7, and Rev. ROWLAND CONNOR. All the addresses were of a rare order of merit, and were listened to with a wrapt attention showing the deep hold which the question has taken upon the public mind. The persuasive, earnest words or LUCY STONE, the finished language and beautiful sentiments of Mrs. BURLEIGH, the close, penetrating logic of HENRY B. BLACKWELL, the brilliant, scholarly utterances Of JULIA WARD H0WE, the eloquent presentation of the question by Mrs. SEVERANCE, the powerful aid of Mrs. LIVERMORE, all contributed to create an impression rarely produced upon an assemblage, and were a fitting termination to the important labors of the convention.Thus Successfully inaugurated, the AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION, commanding the respect of the country, enters upon the organized work which soon or late must result in the establishment of principles so powerfully appealing to the wise, the good, and the liberty-loving of the land.IF men start with the idea that woman is an inferior being, incapable of wide interests, and created for their pleasure alone; if they enact laws and establish customs to sustain these views; if, for the most part, they shut her into harems, consider her so dangerous that she may not walk the streets without a veil--they will write history in accordance with such views, and, whatever may be the facts, they will be interpreted to suit them. -- Caroline H. Dall. "The College, the Market, and the Court." TRY AGAIN.W.J. LintonTHE coldest hours are close upon the morn;Night ever neareth day:Up, man ! and wrestle yet again with scorn;Each footstep is a fall,-move on thy way!Try Again!Is baffled beaten? Will the hero fall,Flung down beneath the wall?Another ladder!  Let our comrades scaleThe top, oer us piled stairlike as we fail! >Try again!0 Hope forlornest, masked like Despair!Truth must some day succeed.Thy failure proves--What? Thy once failing there.Fail yet again if there be martyr need!Try again !W. J. LINTON.Editorial DepartmentTHE CLEVELAND CONVENTION.ELSEWHERE will be found a highly interesting abridged report of the recent Cleveland Convention, preserving all the essential labors of that very successful deliberative assemblage.Perhaps, in our history, no Convention charged with a similarly high mission, ever succeeded in rendering a more satisfactory discharge of duty than the Cleveland Convention, which has given to the country its great need, viz., an efficient, dignified, and truly representative NATIONAL W0MAN SUFFRAGE ORGANIZATION.To those familiar with the detail of the movement, the task of creating an organization which would embody the sentiment and command the respect of the friends of woman suffrage, we need not say, was one fraught with great difficulty. But the conductors of the Cleveland Convention, comprising some of the noblest and most influential men and women in the land, profoundly impressed with the necessity for such action, were not to be diverted from the work by the difficulties attending upon its prosecution. Tirelessly they wrought. Individuals everywhere were appealed to. The aid of the press was invoked. Perhaps not without misgivings assembled those men and women in council in the "Lake City," but the result more than justified the most sanguine expectation. With delegated representation from three-fifths of the States; with increasing audiences from session to session; with harmony of counsel, and a more than ordinary concentration of interest from the outer world, the Convention was fortunate to a rare degree in all of its deliberations. In the addresses pronounced, in the letters received, and in the organization effected, nothing was left to be desired; and the tone of the press throughout the country, in commenting upon the Convention, was in happy contrast to that of former occasions,--all showing the increased respect won for the movement.Since the adjournment of the Cleveland Convention, the inauguration of the systematized campaign, cheering progress has been made of an auxiliary character. State after State wheels into line. New Jersey has held an enthusiastic Convention in response to the New Organization; Pennsylvania wakens from its deep, night-like apathy; the New England States are all aglow with interest; while, like a sharp thunder-clap from the clear sky, the far-off Territory of Wyoming sends to the sisterhood of States the message that, while they halt and hesitate, she has declared the full enfranchisement of woman. With the year 1869, closing so hopefully, what may we not expect from the organized campaign of the year whose dawn is rosy with the victories already won?HAIL, WYOMING!GOOD news comes to us from the West. An infant Territory, lying on the outskirts of civilization, almost beneath the shadows of the Rocky Mountain and within hearing of the far Pacific surge, by one leap of legislation has placed itself in advance of the proudest State of the American Republic, and written in fair characters the principles of EQUAL RIGHTS upon the fresh, young page of its history.All unexpected as was such legislation, this pioneer action of Wyoming Territory loses none of its significance by the many causes assigned to account for such extraordinary action on the part of conservative law makers. It may be--though we are in no mood now to discuss the motives which led to the act--that the members of the Wyoming Legislature were governed purely by selfish considerations in framing and passing such a law, but its far-reaching consequences will be none the less speedy or irrevocable. When the South Carolinians fired upon Sumpter it was with very different expectations of results; and if Democratic assemblymen, for local effect or party purposes, have played with the machinery of law, they will find that a prairie fire has been ignited by the act, whose scorching flames will never be subdued until, searing the conscience and statute book alike, they have swept over every State and Territory under the flag of the Republic.For the benefit of Eastern Solons, this Bill, entitled by its importance to be regarded as the "New Declaration," we present in full. It has
received the signature of Gov. Campbell, and is now the Law of the territory:Be it enacted by the Council and Rouse of Representatives of Wyoming Territory:SECTION I. That every Woman of the age of twenty-one years, residing in this Territory, may at every election to be holden under the laws thereof, cast her vote. And her rights to the elective franchise and to hold office shall be the same under the election laws of the Territory as those of electors.SEC. 2. This Act shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage.WOMEN AS COMPOSITORS.IT is our purpose, in a future number, to speak at some length concerning the occupation of typesetting, as offering more than ordinary inducements to women who desire a pleasant, healthful and remunerative employment.This intention of ours, which has remained as a deferred duty for months with us, has been stimulated into activity by the following paragraph, relative to the employment of women as compositors abroad, which we find floating, without paternity, upon the sea of exchanges:"Nine years ago it was resolved to try the experiment of female handiwork In printing. The Queen took an interest in the matter, and an office was opened in London under the management of Miss Emily Faithfull. The office is open at the present moment. I saw it only to-day. But there is no advance. Miss Faithfull fortunately has left, and things are a little better than they were; but only twenty-five girls are employed, and, after nine years, that is slow work for a new idea. The "trade" is dead against it--as much here as it appears to be in America. I confess to being completely against it myself, but on grounds that would apply to several other female occupations. At Paris, Madrid, Florence, and even St. Petersburg, the scheme has been condemned by the trade journals; but partly for reasons which, it is but fair to say, do not apply to the particular case."That the above discouraging statements, however applicable to England or the Continent, do not at all represent the condition of things in this country, we rejoice to say. In this city alone it is estimated that there are over three hundred women compositors, the proportion as
compared with men printers already being one-tenth. That among this relatively large number there are a fair proportion of skilled, thoroughly reliable compositors, their employment in some of our first-class establishments, such as the Harpers', is sufficient evidence. Especially in the composing rooms of weekly journals they are quite numerous. In rare instances, but sufficient to establish the ability, women compositors have assumed the charge of composing rooms, discharging satisfactorily all the duties of foremen. THE ADVOCATE since its establishment has been under the charge of a young lady, Miss EMILY PEERS, who also, for over a twelve-month, has made up a weekly paper, the well-known AntiSlavery Standard, issued from the same office. In the composition of The Standard and THE ADVOCATE women are chiefly employed, among them several who have learned the business in the office. We do not know that any other paper or magazine in the city is similarly made up, but the fact that one excellently printed paper is entirely under the charge of a woman is proof that others of the sex could be similarly educated.One other point in the paragraph which we have quoted should not be passed without notice. It is the allusion to the opposition of the "Trades." In this city there is a "Woman's Typographical Union," in a flourishing condition, numbering upwards of fifty members. Its efficient president last year, Miss AUGUSTA LEWIS, received the invaluable counsel and assistance of the "Men's Typographical Union" in forming their Association, which was indebted to the Men's Union for many courtesies. By its present able Executive, Miss KATE CUSACK, the writer is assured that those friendly relations are maintained without any abatement or lessening of interest. Joined thus hand in hand, the Men and Women Compositors of New York are setting an example of disinterested friendliness for the Trades Unions of the civilized world to imitate.Will not the love of fair play, which is eminently a characteristic of the English nation, induce our trans-Atlantic brethren to give proper credit to the larger spirit of tolerance which animates the handicraft of Foust and Guttenberg in America?A WORD TO "THE NEWS."THE News of this city in a recent issue, in an editorial upon "The Sphere of Woman," criticises our allusion to that journal in the last issue of THE ADVOCATE.While we acknowledge that the article which first arrested our attention, relative to the Philadelphia outrage, was written with fairness and with more than average ability; while we cheerfully bear testimony to the improved tone of the organ of Benjamin Wood, candor compels us to state that its olden character for conservatism--to use no harsher term--fully justified us in employing the phraseology to which exception has been taken by our contemporary.That this is the case we deeply regret. Of all our cheaper metropolitan dailies, founded to meet the wants of the masses, the News has established the deepest hold upon public favor. It Is more ubiquitous, more all-penetrating, than the keenest-nosed reporter. Go where you may, in the day's decline, over this crowded isle; saunter through the most fashionable thoroughfare, or penetrate the most noisome, pestilent-breeding quarter, and, though other voices may be dumb, you will assuredly be greeted by some straggler from the legion of news-vending tatterdemalions, lustily crying the "News." What its actual circulation is we have no means of knowing; but we never think of its immense editions going daily into the hands of tens of thousands-the great army of toil-but what the reflection is forced upon us that here one of the grandest opportunities to be an Educator of the Public is lost. With its present hold on the masses, the proprietor of the  News might so elevate it in tone that the thousands depending almost entirely upon it for mental aliment might have good wholesome food set before them by which they would be incalculably benefited, and yet the receipts of the journal, probably, in nowise be diminished.Think of it, Benjamin Wood! The world knows you as a man whose means largely have been acquired by and through credulity of the public, will you not show that same world that of the wealth in your hands you will prove a "good steward?"THE NEWARK CONVENTION.A very successful Convention, under the auspices of the New Jersey Woman Suffrage Association, was held at Newark on the 8th and 9th ult. Among the speakers were LUCY STONE, LUCRETIA MOTT, MARY F. DAVIS, Rev. PHEBE A. HANAFORD, CASSIUS M. CLAY and Mrs. C. M. SEVERANCE. The presence and words of the honored LUCRETIA MOTT lent additional interest to the Convention; and Hon. CASSIUS M. CLAY was welcomed to the platform with rapturous applause. The interest manifested in the Convention by the city and press of Newark was remarkable. Four sessions were held, the last of which, especially, was large and spirited. Among the excellent resolutions adopted was one ratifying the action of the Executive Committee of the State Association in sending delegates to Cleveland, and declaring the New Jersey Society auxiliary to the American Woman Suffrage Association.The State Society of New Jersey is now in excellent working condition. LUCY STONE--a host in herself--is its President; and embraced in the organization are such tried, efficient coadjutors as ANTOINETTE BROWN BLACKWELL, PORTIA GAGE, ANDREW J. and MARY F. DAVIS, II. B. BLACKWELL, ROWLAND JOHNSON, Dr. JAMES BROTHERTON, and others. New Jersey, with some justness, has been designated, the Eastern Egypt of our Union, but, surely, with such an array of gallant natures, battling for Truth and Justice, its darkness must give way to the sunlight yet to burst upon the land."NOT LOSS BUT GAIN."THE Agitator is no more. The journal endeared to us all, whose weekly visit ever was like a fresh exhilaration from the breezy West, gladdening and elevating all hearts within its influence,--henceforward we will look for in vain. Fearless as the Western heart was its counsel; broad as its prairies were its sympathies; it leaped from its cradle, fullgrown, to activity and power, and extorted, not sued, the respect of the press and the admiration of the public.Very sorrowfully would the announcement of its extinction fall upon many hearts were not the consolation afforded of a speedy resurrection, with a career more brilliant and useful for the Future than attended even upon its Past. Instead of The Agitator, the new paper is to be christened the Woman's Journal; and instead of Chicago the base of operations is transferred to Boston. The Queen City of the West loses; but the intellectual metropolis of New England receives. New England capital is to grease the wheels; New England brains largely to furnish the material and bestow character; but Mrs. LIVERMORE, and all that is best and most indestructible of the West, is to remain. For the new journal Mrs. LIVERMORE is announced as managing editor; and JULIA WARD HOWE, LUCY STONE, WM. LLOYD GARRISON, and T. W. HIGGINSON complete one of the most brilliant editorial corps ever comprised in the management of a journal.The first number of The Woman's Journal, which should be the Woman Suffrage paper of America, is announced to appear on the first of January. Most cordially, in advance, do we wish it success.PLEASANT WORDS--THE ADVOCATE.IT has been no part of our purpose, as our readers will bear witness, to make a display of the friendly notices THE ADVOCATE, from time to time, has commanded from the press; or by unworthy means to seem to elicit a more favorable response from the public than its merits would justify. Hence while, within the year of our existence, we have rarely broken through this rule, which so few publications have sought to observe; carefully filed away, as valued testimonials, are very many unsought expression of sympathy and commendation upon our course, conveyed by letter or by type, couched in language that has gone straight to the heart and nerved our being for fresh exertion. One of the latest of these gratifying evidences that our labors have not been unappreciated, is from the pen of Mrs. LIVERMORE in one of the latest issues of The Agitator, which as the opinion of one of the most illustrious of American women, whose career we have followed with admiration, we cannot resist the inclination to lay before our readers:"The New York WOMAN'S ADVOCATE  is a monthly, and one of the very best of the periodicals devoted to the cause of woman. Antoinette Brown Blackwell began a very interesting serial story in the November number, and those who now subscribe for the year 1870, receive the November and December numbers of THE ADVOCATE free, which contain the two issues of her story. We always read THE ADVOCATE thoroughly, for it is conducted with rare good taste and ability. Its price is $1.50 per annum, and our local societies in the West, who hold monthly meetings, will always find in it a paper of unusual ability and freshness, to read at the meeting. Had not each local society better subscribe for at least one number?"THE present number of THE ADVOCATE is mailed to all of our old subscribers who have not requested a discontinuance of their names. If future numbers are desired a renewal of subscription must be received.LITERARY.SPIRIT MYSTERIES EXPLAINED.The Inner Life. By Andrew Jackson Davis. 424 pp. Boston: Wm. White & Co. Among the books longer upon our shelf, to which, again and again, we have been irresistibly attracted, not, perhaps, because yielding assent to many of the views of the gifted writer, but charmed by his breadth of thought and the great Principles comprehensively treated,--is the above work by the well-known author and Spiritual teacher, Andrew Jackson Davis.The volume is divided into fourteen heads or parts, among the more suggestive of which may be mentioned: "A Survey of Human Needs," "Definition of Philosophy and Spiritualism," "The External Argument," "The Classification of Causes," "A Voice to the Insane," and "Phenomena of the Spiritual Spheres." Under the bead of "A Survey of Human Needs," page 11, the writer says:The object of this chapter is to show that the world, especially in this century, heeds a 'Philosophy' higher than the schools can furnish, and a 'Spiritualism' more demonstrative than the churches possess-needs these, in order to destroy the hatreds of the churches; to cast this creed and that religion into the world's treasury of experience; to enrich our minds with a unitary understanding of all natural and spiritual things; and finally, to render all things, which pertain to our physical and mental being, universal and harmonious."To the general reader, perhaps the most interesting portion of the volume will be found that embraced under the head, "The External Argument," in which
the writer ably argues the "Possibility, the Probability, and the Certainty of Spiritual Intercourse." Profoundly impressed himself with the verity of Spiritual Intercourse, the writer earnestly seeks to disseminate the "glad tidlngs;" and, perhaps, not in volume beside are there passages of closer logic, rarer beauty, or intenser interest. History from ancient to modern times is ranged over; the Scriptures are appealed to; nothing that might illuminate the subject, or settle doubt, seemingly, is left untouched. Yet with all this command of knowledge, this marvelous display of scientific and historic attainment, there is a frankness, an almost child-like simplicity and candor, which wins irresistibly upon the reader. Whether he accepts or rejects the theory, he cannot but accord sincerity to its advancer. One of the most important illustrations of this, in view of the rapid growth of spiritualism as a religious belief, occurs on page 372, wherein the writer says:"It is no plan of mine to establish a new form of sectarianism. A desire so low and so unworthy a Man has never for a single moment occupied my brain. Sectarianism has been the curse of the Christian world. The good, and truth, and beauty of the doctrines of Jesus have been deformed and placed in unnatural juxtapositions by the sectarian schemes of certain famous men. If I know anything, I know this. Consequently, should I become fired with sectarianism, and set myself to the work of constructing a new Party--merely a new form of an existing Evil--then manifestly I would be sinning against the Holy Ghost: transgressing against the Sovereign Law of Right within me, upon which alone are established the equilibrium of character and that interior happiness which every one is organized to possess.""A Voice to the Insane," is a valuable paper, well worth the perusal. Our feverish American character is dissected, and the causes which lead to insanity are unfolded, while the finger-guides of caution and prudence are erected. "Benefits of Experience, and Phenomena of the Spiritual Spheres," are each excellent; and scattered all throughout the volume are thoughts upon Life and Duty which cannot be too seriously pondered by mortals. Truly, the volume is one whose circulation should be wide.WEDLOCK; OR THE RIGHT RELATIONS OF THE SEXES. By S. R. Wells. 236 pp. New York: S. R. Wells.The same excellence of matter, which is a characteristic of all the works of that sterling house, yet better known to many as that of Fowler & Wells, is to be found in the carefully prepared volume by its now sole representative, S. R. Wells.Mr. Wells, to the knowledge acquired by a life-long study, with rare opportunities, of the human organization, unites great feeling and delicacy; and, under his hand, the "much-abused theme" becomes aglow with interest; while a vast
amount of 'information is imparted, and valuable hints given for the guidance of sensible men and women in taking "unto themselves companions for life."The writer's ideal of wedlock, as well as of the motives governing him in the preparation of the volume, will best be learned from the preface, a paragraph of which we quote:"If the motive for marriage be high and holy; if the parties be of proper age, of sound body and mind; and if there be an irresistible affinity for each other, such as will not only truly unite their souls but hold them firmly together through all trials and to all time, then it is both their privilege and their duty to unite in the holy bonds of matrimony. Of such relations are born children- offspring of love and design rather than of lust and of chance-more favorably organized, harmonious, self-regulating, law-abiding, well-disposed."In addition to the vast fund of information comprised within its pages, interspersed all throughout the volume are gems, quotations from the poets, illustrating the particular theme, and adding piquancy and value to the work.OUR EXCHANGES.Herald of Health.--This truly valuable magazine promises, for 1870, even more than its usual excellence. Mrs. Elizabeth Oakes Smith contributes a serial story, and the old corps of writers, who have lent its pages such sterling worth in past issues, are all announced for the New Volume. We trust it may win a yet increased circulation, commensurate with its just value. Subscription price, $2 .00 a year. Wood & Holbrook, Publishers, New York.Phrenological Journal.--This sterling monthly rounds its Fiftieth Volume by the true golden wedding ceremony of appearing in a becoming new dress, and by a change to the more convenient magazine form of issue. One of the oldest of American journals, this excellent periodical, by its veteran services of one-fourth of a century in the reformatory field, well merits the degree of popularity it enjoys. Subscription price, $3.00 a year. S. R. Wells, Publisher, New York.Packard's Monthly. --Although fearing greatly that Mr. Packard will be spoiled by the unlimited praise bestowed upon his popular monthly, we cannot forbear here saying that the glimpse afforded us of the January number, assures us that every promise of excellence is more than fulfilled. We wonder now how the reading public ever got along without Packard's. Entirely without the element of fiction, it has yet engrafted itself upon public favor as have few of the old established monthlies. Always it is bright, racy, readable. Not profound, truly; but removed from levity, thoroughly original and enjoyable. Subscription price, $2.00. S. S. Packard, Publisher, New York.Harper's Monthly, Bazar and Weekly.--Is there need to say a word of the merits of any of the well-known Harper publications? Upon the journals, the New Year dawns with, as the chief attraction of the Weekly, the powerfully
written romance, "Man and Wife," by Wilkie Collins; while for the Bazar, "Debenham's Vow," by Mrs. Amelia B. Edwards, holds the place of favor. The Monthly, with its serial, "A Brave Lady," one of Mrs. Craik's (Miss Muloch) best fictions; its illustrated articles, and its charming stories, is not less attractive than of old; and we can scarcely fancy a well-ordered country-house into which these three unrivalled publications do not regularly enter as welcome, indispensable guests. Fortunate above all other periodicals are the Harpers' in possessing a monopoly of the pen of George William Curtis, whose graceful, varied productions, the "Easy Chair" of the one, or the able "Editorials" of the others, impart a value to the works possessed by no other periodicals. Subscription price of each, $4.00; the three to one address, $10.00. Harper Brothers, Publishers, New York.  The Atlantic, Every Saturday. --Equally superfluous here seems comment. "Joseph and his Friend," by Bayard Taylor, opening well, is the serial for the Monthly, for 1870, while all the old features of this established favorite remain unchanged; and Every Saturday promises enlargement, change of form, and superior attractions for the New Volume. Subscription price of each, $1.00. Fields, Osgood & Co., Publishers, Boston.Lipincott's Magazine.--Among the newer, but not the less substantial looking, of our established monthlies is the ever welcome Lippincott's, the sole representative of its class that the "Quaker City" possesses. The two serials which have been running through the year, "The Vicar of Bullhampton," by Anthony Trollope, and "Beyond the Breakers," by Robert Dale Owen, are both continued. The usual variety of tales, essays, scientific papers are promised for 1870. The assertion that there are six first-class American monthlies, has caused much discussion of late respecting the merits of our leading magazines, and as to which of the number should be so regarded, but, though a variety of opinion exists, we have met with no table which leaves out Lippincott's. Subscription price, $4.00. Lippincott & Co, Publishers, Philadelphia.CLUB RATES. -- IMP0RTANT REDUCTI0N.THE ADVOCATE hereafter will be furnished at $1.50 per year, single copy, and sent to addresses as desired, in Clubs of four or more, upon the following terms:Four subscriptions, . . . . $5.00 Ten       do        . . . . 10.00 Twenty    "	     . . . . 16.00We will hereafter send The Nat. Anti-Slavery Standard ($3.00 a year) and THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE, each one year to old or new subscribers, the two for $4. 00; --The Radical ($4.00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $5.00;The Herald of Health ($2. 00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $3.50.Advertising DepartmentHERALD OF HEALTH FOR 1870.We are happy to state to our many readers that Mrs. ELIZABETH OAKES SMITH, the author of "Kitty Howard's Journal," and other excellent articles which have been so highly praised by our readers, will furnish us with an appropriate and charming story for the year 1870! The story will be one which will be eagerly read by all our readers with great profit.Our friends must send in their subscriptions to be served early. To enable them to form clubs now, we offer to give the October, November, and December numbers FREE to new subscribers who send in their names for 1870, soon.To any one who will remit $5 at one time, we will send THE HERALD for 1870, the book on "PHYSICAL, INTELLECTUAL, AND MORAL CULTURE," and the work entitled "A WINTER IN FLORIDA."Now is the time to work! The HERALD for 1870 will be full of the best things by the best writers, and none can afford to do without it. $2 a year, 20 cents a number.WOOD HOLBROOK, Publishers,13 & 15 Laight Street,New York.BLACKWELL & C0.,92 Warren Street, Trenton, N.J.Dealers in Agents forThe Latest and Most Improved in MachineryFor the Farm and Garden.MANUFACTURERS AND INVENTORSare solicited to send us their circulars and terms, as, being centrally located in one of the most productive farming districts, and having amongst our customers the most enterprising farmers, we are prepared to give first-class implements a favorable introduction.Address  BLACKWELL & CO.,Agricultural and Seed Warehouse,92 Warren street, Trenton, N. J.N. B.-Please state where you saw this advertisement.THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE,
DEVOTED TO WOMAN:Her entire emancipation from Religious, Social, Political, and Moral Degradation.TERMS.One copy, one year. . . . . . . . . . . . $2.50 One copy, six months . . . . . . . . . . . 1.25Address the proprietor,  J. J. BELVILLE.Dayton, Ohio.THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATENO. II. FEBRUARY, 1870. VOL. III.THE MARKET WOMAN.Antoinette Brown Blackwell(Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1869, by ANTOINETTE BROWN BLACKWELL, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of New York.]CHAPTER VII.
THE VISIT.THE three women were soon on their way to pay the unusual afternoon visit -- the two elders each with knitting-work in pocket, neatly rolled up; the needles thrust into a knitting sheath at one end and into the ball of cotton yarn at the other; for this was summer knitting, and the whole was carefully wrapped in a white handkerchief to keep it from soiling even in the clean visiting dress pockets. The younger woman had her fine sewing, kept especially for holiday work, and all three were in slightly excited spirits.Impromptu afternoon visiting is the beautiful social blossoming of all primitive neighborhood relations in a democratic community-the very sweetest and fairest flower of feminine good fellowship. . The early settlers and farmers' wives generally, in the even-handed old times, would have endured social starvation but for this wholesome custom; yet it does not altogether harmonize with the needs of a locality where there are either wide social distinctions or varied business occupations. Modern society never visits; it calls on its special circle of friends, and it makes and accepts formal invitations. If gentlemen were to visit a lawyer who was preparing himself for the next day's court, or a merchant busy with his invoices, or a doctor whose horse was at the door and a
round of patients waiting restlessly for his coming, the most polite man of them all might graciously accept the situation for ten minutes more or less, then his thinking would inevitably include the word "bore" for another brief space; but at the end of that time, the most superlative good nature would excuse itself on the grounds of pressing engagements, and no offence taken. Even busy ladies, in these modern days, may have an "at home" evening which frees them from the interruption at inconvenient hours, but nothing of the sort was recognized in those earlier times of which I write. Everybody expected, at least once in the season, to spend an afternoon with everybody else within walking distance, and often far beyond that immediate neighborhood, for country women enjoy the one luxury of horses, and are bound to make them pay for their keep whenever it is not a busy farming time.Even a minister, now-a-days, whose leisure is bargained for in advance and paid for at so much a year as a joint stock investment by the whole congregation, may excuse himself sometimes on sermon days, especially if it is the end of the week; but this was Friday, and on Saturday market demands are at least three times as pressing as on an other day; but our three good women, of course, did not understand anything about that; yet as the Rebands had somehow become an exception on their visiting list, they all felt on the present occasion that they were rather taking a liberty in going uninvited.Mrs. Reband, the younger, received her neighbors courteously at the door, took them into the best room, seated them all in a row; and seeing at a glance that they had evidently come to stay, asked them to take off their bonnets. This they did with alacrity, even after she had expressed her regret at the absence of her mother-in-law for the afternoon. Then each visitor drew out her work, while Susan sat a moment asking after the health of themselves and their families severally, and remarking upon the state of the weather. All this was in strict accordance with custom. As she had on a well-faded working dress, which was also quite customary with country women who did their own work, even in the afternoon, provided there was no company, it was also in order now to rise and excuse herself for a little while, leaving them to entertain each other meantime. But now she ought to have gone either straight to the kitchen to effect a few first hasty arrangements for a nice tea, or else directly to her own room to dress; returning as quickly as possible to her guests and the afternoon visiting, until time to get the tea. Instead of this, Mrs. Reband went to the garden and to gathering vegetables as if for a wager.What was she to do, poor woman? Her husband and his mother, as chance would have it, were both away; the older children were at school, and the men
at their own work in the fields. Gathering the produce for market, moreover was never a part of their tasks, and, altogether uninstructed in it, to start them now at anything requiring so much nicety as this, was quite out of the question. For twenty minutes she wrought on without a pause, then she put everything aside and actually did wash and dress according to programme, but in haste and with some vexation it must be confessed; for a more inconvenient time for visitors could not well have occurred even in that always busy household. Do you say, alas for her popularity! A great Publishing House in New York, whose business it is to receive the scribbling public and look into its proposals, found it politic to assign to its senior partner the special duty of entertaining the bores. Her senior partner was not at home.In half an hour by the clock Mrs. Reband was back again in the parlor, never hinting that it had not taken her the whole half hour to dress. But the visitors were fully posted on this subject nevertheless. She had gone out from the back door and purposely kept out of sight of the parlor window. But good Mrs. Dinsmore had made an errand into the yard and peered round till she saw the faded calico dress and a well-known dark calico sunbonnet in the vegetable patch. The pink bonnet was always kept for market, like all the new dresses.The good gossip returned to the parlor not at all offended, but in a high state of delight. "She is out there gathering her vegetables! I told you so.""Speak low, the little fellow is out under the window, digging," whispered Mrs. Jane Bradshaw."Did you ever!" murmured Mrs. Butts. "I never heard the like in my life. Nobody will believe me when I get back to Ohio and tell them. Hospitality is a religious duty there."You'll see she'll get us a nice tea, though" whispered Mrs. Jane. "If she's stingy she don't show it to visitors -- not in anything but her own time."When Mrs. Reband took her seat in the parlor, she placed herself where she Could glance at the kitchen clock, for it was already late. The visitors had not come early; it had taken Mrs. Bradshaw too long to put on her best things after the visit was suggested to her; and now as there was a party of men in the field and the guests all to be duly fed, there was not much time to be lost. However, Mrs. Reband took up her knitting and sat apparently a lady of leisure-a rather grave and quiet, but altogether exemplary hostess, answering questions without leaving any one much the wiser therefor, and not asking any in return.In exactly fifteen minutes she rose, slipped noiselessly out of the room, leaving the kitchen door still ajar, and began mixing biscuits, stirring cake, and a custard; filling the tea-kettle, and kindling the wood stove, which had gone out
according to the Summer custom. All this was dispatched with a cleverness that either of the three women would have envied if they could have looked on; but she was out of eye-shot from the parlor, though neither party was out of hearing of ordinary conversation in the adjoining room. Little Henry dame in and was sent to wash face and hands and put himself into a clean apron ready to seethe ladies."What did they come for, mother?" asked the little fellow, returning in a presentable state to the kitchen, just as his mother was turning the cake, baking in the oven."They came to get a nice tea," answered the market woman in her simple, matter-of-fact tone which sounded distinctly in the ears of the three listening ladies."Are you going to give them that cake, and the nice custard, and the biscuits?" he asked, peeping into the oven."Yes, Henry.""Why, mother?""Because it is a duty to be hospitable," she answered, as though she had taken a dive into the thoughts of her visitors."What does hospitable mean, mother?" persisted the boy."It means doing everything that is nice and comfortable for people who come to see you, no matter how inconvenient it may be for yourself."She spoke in exactly her usual tones, and the child was satisfied; but the six eyebrows in the parlor were all lifted a little ominously, though a running conversation went on there meantime.The kitchen table was now drawn out, covers laid, and it was hastily spread, chiefly with cold, substantial food. A pot of common tea was made in the common teapot, the best teapot was scalded and a generous drawing of best tea placed in it, but not yet wet. The children now returned from school; their mother met them at the side-door, explained that it was necessary they should go out at once and gather vegetables, giving her directions briefly and clearly, and then once more examining the state of her oven, she produced a snowy best table-cloth and her mother-in-law's china tea-set, and spread the parlor table with little Henry's help, who laid plates and knives and carried everything which he could."May I sit down, too?" he whispered."Yes, if you will be good.""Can't John and Mary come too, mother?""No, they haven't time."Sweet-meats, cottage cheese, and. honey; light bread, butter, a tempting jug of cream, and the newly cooked dainties were placed on the supper table; and when all was ready Mrs. Reband went out, closing the door behind her. She bad blown the horn to summon the men from the field, and she now added to their table a plate of the biscuits and the boiling tea-pot, and pouring them each a cup of tea, went into the porch where they were washing hands and explained to them that she had company, and they must help themselves. Then she disappeared into the inner room, bearing the fragrant best tea-pot into which she had but just poured the boiling water; and they all took seats at the table.Everything was delightful of its kind, and every visitor's wants supplied with a lavish hand.  Little Henry had a biscuit and a slice of cold bread placed on his plate together, and he was asked what he would like to eat with them."I want honey, mother.""The honey was supplied."Can't I have butter and honey both?" said the child, eyeing some of the ladies who were freely mingling those delicacies."No, dear. You may have either butter or honey; but not both at once." There was no remonstrance, and eating and chatting progressed under the stimulus of the strong and fragrant tea."Can I eat cake and custard together, mother?" asked Henry again after a pause."Do you want anything more, Baby? if you do, take this bread with the custard, and eat the cake afterwards.""Can't I have cheese, too?""Not at the same time; two things together are enough for a little boy."The mother answered with the utmost simplicity, while Baby at once acquiesced. It was the general family programme and a hobby of the market woman that only two things should be eaten together; and that a more extensive mingling of flavors led to a perverted taste, and disposed to indigestion. If Elie had any intention of giving her visitors a lesson, this did not appear in voice or manner; but they all noticed that her example accorded with her precept, and it must be admitted that it detracted somewhat from their enjoyment of the variety of viands.In reality Mrs. Reband knew very well that these two neighbors were both gifted with a free use of speech and eye. She had a fair inkling Of the nature of their gossip with the Western visitor, which had resulted in bringing the trio together that afternoon; and in her heart she was not greatly desirous of a repetition of the same. Instead of checking her child, therefore, she had answered
his question exactly as she Would have done in their absence, leaving the result to take care of itself.At parting, there was a neighborly handshake, another regret at the absence of her mother and husband, and civil compliments given and returned. When invited by the ladles to visit them, she replied that her business necessarily occupied her in Summer. In Winter she might perhaps find time to be more neighborly. She walked with them to the gate with parting words, as she opened it for them, and stood holding it ajar till their final good evening."She didn't ask us to come again, though!" said Jane Bradshaw, tossing her head, "and when I do go, it will be after this!"CHAPTER VIII.MOTHER AND CHILDREN.MRS. REBAND returned to the kitchen where her children were just finishing their supper.  She had left them a fair share of good things, and they were eating and chatting comfortably by themselves. The shadow of a dark smile fell from her eyes, and the corners of her mouth were drawn a little closely as she walked along the path. This smile, which was not uncommon with her, was altogether peculiar to herself, and never intended for the eyes of another. It seemed to be the natural outlet for feelings which a reticent woman, who was averse to telling her left hand what her right band doeth, cannot or will not express in words even to the nearest and dearest. It suggested a process of self-consultation and conclusion which never framed itself into speech, and which may be best hinted at by the pungent phrase, "Deep as a well."If her thoughts bad found words on this occasion, it is probable that they would have sounded like a refrain of Mrs. Bradshaw's. "I didn't ask them to come again, and when they do come it will be after this!" But her thoughts did pot find utterance in words, and perhaps it would be hardly fair to interpret them, from the context of her manner.She came in to the children looking in their eyes precisely as calm, kindly, alert and energetic as usual, and no more so. "Now Mary and John don't hurry the supper; but when that is over there is a great deal to be done, and father and grandmother will not be here before dark. We'll put away the food and leave the dishes to be washed when we get everything done in the garden. Is the cake nice, Johnnie?" smiling at the little fellow's evident relish of the last morsel.Three little voices chimed in at once, "First rate. So nice, mother! Isn't it very nice!"  "Nice, mother. I wish we could have company every day!"She endorsed all their little enthusiasms in a very motherly way, sunning each little heart with her sympathy. "Company every day, Baby! That would be like a Summer Christmas all the time, wouldn't it?" depositing the fragments meantime in the pantry, that nothing need be lost, according to Scripture economy.When I am grown up, mother, I mean to go visiting to get such nice teas," said little Henry."Do you, Baby? Take care then that you don't get as fat as our old man, who comes to buy things at the market. When people go visiting often in a year and get such teas as that, if it don't make them sick, sometimes they grow till they can't see their own feet; and they have to keep a little black boy to tie their shoes.""Do they, mother?" said the little fellow, ruefully, standing with both hands in his first pockets, and his feet wide apart as he listened with astonishment. " I shouldn't like that!""No, Henry," piped little womanly Mary, "I shouldn't either; and I'd rather run about and do things than be lifted into a carriage, like a big doll, and have to smoke a pipe, like old Mrs. Pugsley, so as to keep thin. That's what she smokes for; she told me so, mother, and she keeps cake all the time, and eats it every day. She always gives me some when I see her."Nice things don't taste as well to us if we eat them every day," said the mother; marching into the garden like a mother hen followed by her three chicks. And as busy as chickens in a freshly dug garden they all were, picking and picking, but not for themselves; till baskets and boxes were well filled; and just as the last gold and purple had faded from their sky and gone on in search of the ever setting sun, the little brood rested from their labors and went into the house."If only it wasn't for musquitoes, mother, I should like working after sunset; but just look here, and here, and here," pointing to the stinging, red blotches.""And here too, mother;" "and here too!" chimed one and another."Yes, the musquitoes are troublesome towards night. Now we'll shut them out with the musquito door and the window nets, and we'll light the lamp. There's a saucer of salt and water to rub the bites, and you may all play the rest of the evening or read, just as you like.""Let's all play odd and even," cried little Henry bringing out his small red cup of white and colored beans."I'd rather read my new book," said John."Then sissie you play, won't you?" pleaded the little fellow, coaxingly."Yes, but I want to help mother wipe the dishes first."" No I'll wipe dishes when mother is ready," said John, looking up from the book which he had already seized upon; "you play with Baby.""I don't want any more help, to-night," said the mother, decidedly. "You have all been good children and done enough."The two willing little ones were soon perched on the bottom stair of the flight which comes down into the kitchen, the chamber door making a back to their seat, alternatively crying, "odd and even," in the little, ringing childish voices, musical even to the most indifferent ears. To the mother, the stream of endless prattle, with its eddies of laughter, was as pleasant as a brook splashing and babbling over the stones would be to a poet, listening from his green niche under the trees. This mother was a mother and not a poet, and she was washing dishes after a wearisome day instead of dreaming deliciously in the midst of an idle one; but she felt no hardship now in her work. There is a great store-house of compensations laid up somewhere, so that the most insignificant worker always finds himself unexpectedly rewarded, strengthened, ennobled in the midst of his faithful toll; and men have sung psalms in dungeons from out the fullness of their overflowing hearts.Nature had given Mrs. Reband the temperament of a worker, and education had strengthened it. The weariness vanished as she listened to the chime of voices, and looked proudly towards Johnnie, flushed, smiling and oblivious of everything in the delight of his new story. She had put a small but brilliant lard lamp upon the table by his side, while she worked on herself in comparative shadow, lighting a tallow dip when she had occasion to go out of the room for anything.The hired men were still lounging and smoking under the trees, the room was tidied up, and the mother seated herself, the children leaving everything else to gather round her, like a cluster of bees about their queen when she is ready to settle down. The father and grandmother soon returned; and now came the account of the small journey and the day's events. Then the children were dispatched to bed, speedily, followed by the elders. Everybody slept soundly in that household."Is it all right, John?" asked the wife, who had waited till they stood together in their own room. "Did you bring the papers?"He replied by producing some exceedingly legal looking documents; handing them to his wife with a beaming face. One paper proved to be a deed of fifty-two acres of land assigned to John Reband and Susan Reband jointly, in consideration of the sum of six thousand, two hundred and forty dollars;-two thousand,
two hundred and forty dollars, had been paid, but the other four thousand were in the form of a bond and mortgage on the property itself.This land adjoined their own original farm. It was not cheap, estimated by the current value of neighboring land; yet they both felt sure from all the signs of the times, that it would greatly rise in value within a few years. Besides they needed more land for grass and grain as they went along; the vegetable domain was perhaps large enough already. So at least they reasoned, and on that assumption had acted; being now the possessors of more than a hundred acres, but with the four thousand dollars of debt. They had, however, some lea-way of ready money -- a large amount of "rolling stock," health, and hope."You see we can't keep our heads out from under a mortgage after all!" said John, laughing, "It seems as natural to us as your pink market bonnet does.""Yes, John. We put it on for an occasion in the same way.""You take it coolly enough now, Susy; but this one is twice as heavy as that other mortgage we married under more than a dozen years ago.""But this one doesn't rest exactly on our heads though; it is hanging on the chimney tops of the other house, and the shadow falls only on the Canada thistles which grow in our new East lots.""Well, the very shadow of it will kill all the thistles. Not much doubt about that!" said the husband, rubbing his hands well satisfied."Yes, I should hope so! We shall make five hundred dollars an acre on that land yet, Johnniekin, to say nothing of the difference of value between Canada thistles and grass. The rise in value is coming with the New York settlements; and they are beginning to spread like the white mold on the inside of an old water pail. They don't make much show yet; but they will directly.""Eh, Susan!" said John, a little surprised. "Then it is well perhaps that you think it won't do to take more land than the farm will carry as it goes along, in case of sickness or death, else we might become millionaires without thinking of it, according to your arithmetic, Susy.""Enough is better than a feast, which might leave us bankrupt," was Mrs. Reband's reply. The rare, bright smile which now and then covered the whole of her face covered it over now and rested upon it like a delaying sunset. It belonged to the same family, but certainly not to the same species with that other half smile of hers which  oftener flitted around but never lighted up her countenance. One never caught that except by some side glance. It came by stealth and was hastily uprooted; but this grew till, for the time, it blotted out every line and incipient crowsfoot just beginning to deepen in her face, and gave her the holy beauty of perfect self-forgetfulness."We must soon begin to think of a good school, John, where we can send the children to be educated."A lady once congratulated an English country woman upon a legacy which had recently fallen to her and her good man. "Yes," the worthy dame answered  contentedly, "It will help us to get a little better eatables and drinkables than we used before."  The man or woman who earns money by persistent effort, generally has a keen eye to its possible various uses. The market woman had struck the key-note to her own central idea, "We must educate the children!"ANTOINETTE BROWN BLACKWELL.Robert W. Hume"VANITAS VANITATIS."From the Cradle to the Grave Toiling on;Merry Morn and weary Even Come and gone.Nothing stable-nought enduring As we range;All above, around, beneath us, Ceaseless change.Never fixed, but ever moving,Stars are found;And the Planets in their orbits Circle round.Whilst the Moon with varying aspect Rolls above;And the Sun itself is changing As we move.Ocean ebbs and flows forever, River-fed;Surging, shrinking, rising, fallingIn its bed.And the Seasons in their order Ever range;Spring and Summer, Autumn, Winter, Ceaseless change.Underneath the Earth's broad bosom Pencilled fair;Are the Records of the RacesWritten there.Reptiles, Fishes, Birds and Mammals,Come and gone;Where the Forest-trees are changing Into stone.So, in Sunshine and in Shadow, --Passes life;Hope and Joy,-Despair and Sorrow, Peace and Strife.Youth departs, and Manhood's fancies Fill the breast;'Till in Age our weary spiritsSigh for rest.ROBERT W. HUME.HOW TO ENTERTAIN OUR FRIENDS.Frances D. GageAMONG the many conventionalisms that now-a-days clog the wheels of that ponderous vehicle, society, making them go creaking over the hard thoro'fares of life, like unoiled market carts, setting our nerves ajar by discordant gratings and groanings, are the rules of etiquette regulating fashionable calling and visiting. Friends that really esteem each other and would be only too happy to spend an evening once a week together for mutual pleasure and social converse, are found marking time and remembering with distinct care, who made the last call, and counting the days till it shall be conventional to call again. Whose fault is this? Do you want your neighbor to be sure and wait till you have returned her last ere she comes in again? Do you care whether she comes in her every day dress (all ladies should be neat and trim at home as well as abroad) and brings her work, and sits with you sociably an hour or two, or do you exact that she shall come in her last basque and flounces, with her best bonnet, parasol, fan and gloves? If you do not exact this formality from her, why insist in imposing it upon her? Why not live out what you profess to admire? Her heart is perhaps as true as yours. Do not go dressed up next time, to wait in dim parlors, with closed blinds, till she leaves her work and goes through the same operation of "dressing up" before she can venture into your presence! She will
perhaps be compelled to leave work that she is hurrying about, to undergo all this inconvenience because she really desires to see you, and consequently will not ask you to excuse her. How silly, how cumbersome is all this, and yet every day of my life I see or know of ladies who have been acquaintances for years going through with it all, when a little good sense and carrying out of the rule they each profess to strive to follow, doing unto others as they would that others should do unto them, would dispose of the whole difficulty.The caller would call in her daily attire, (we hope all ladies dress neatly and tidily at home) and her friend received her in the same way, each continuing as far as possible the regular order of her work, or if not busy, each accepting the other with the freedom of true friendship.In cities and thickly populated neighborhoods this calling becomes a real oppression, and many people, unable to keep up with its requirements, are dropped out of society and are scarce known as living, breathing members of the great body. To those who cannot relinquish the pleasure of the social circle, who find no friend they want to lose, and whose mode of life increases the number daily, it often becomes a serious affair, and consumes so much time as to leave them little for anything else. "I have so much company," is the exclamation of nearly every agreeable well to do wife and housekeeper in the country."I was just ready to set about house-cleaning or washing bed-clothes, or had everything prepared to can my fruit, when who should come but neighbor Smith and his wife and two girls. I was very glad to see them. Mrs. Smith is so agreeable and Mr. Smith is a perfect encyclopedia. But then, coming in at such a time, just spoiled the whole visit."Now is there not some way to avoid all this, or most of it? Say each lady agrees upon a reception day, once a week or once in two weeks, as she can afford, and lets it be known that upon that day she will receive her friends, not to feast them with good dinners and exquisite teas, but to chat with them, to pour out upon them the thoughts and feelings she has been gathering up as she walked, with steady steps, through the intervening days of duty in the housewife's department, and receive from them their experiences during the same interval. It is high time that our social relations should be based on something less animal than eating and drinking. Many a social evening would thus
be spent by congenial minds with both. pleasure and profit, enlivening and beautifying life, if persons could be released from the drudgery of cooking, table-setting, dressing, and the irksomeness of waiting on a large company."Oh! but," you exclaim, "it is not always convenient to receive company just such a day, or to go abroad just such a day."It is not always convenient to have Sunday come, and yet, who would do without it, even if there was no duty or obligation attached to it. It is the central point of the week, the time when most well regulated families square up the household arrangements, put a new polish the spoons, let in new light, open the windows, clear out the old cupboards, dispose of all mold, dust and cobwebs, and wake Sabbath morning clean and new, with bread enough cooked, and all the wheels fresh oiled and cleaned, so that they will run smooth and quiet through all the day, and the body released from its toilings and moilings, gives strength to the upward soaring pinions of the truly religious spirit, those that seek God from the innermost of their being, as the source of light and strength, to enter in and dwell with Him and He with them.So would it be with these, sometimes, for social intercourse. They would originate hope and energy, induce order and throw a kind of halo over the various arrangements of the week, make the heart beat lighter, call the mind away from the mere detail of business, and more than all make us think, compel us to arrange something to say, to make ourselves interesting to those that come, and those we go to meet. And the strife in a neighborhood would soon come to be, not who can get up the most luxuriant and expensive supper, but who makes all guests feel the most happy, and sends them away with the most new ideas to cogitate upon in the weeks to come. Dissimilar minds would be brought together, and perhaps to the astonishment of all parties, they would find there was not after all so wide a gulf between them, and that idle gossip had given poor pictures of both factions, quite unjust to the originals. In this social communion--these common receptions--by all means let the young and old visit together. It is a fact past dispute that young people do vitalize and keep warm and fresh the life currents of the old, while the old harmonize and cool down the over-heated emotions and impulses of the young.The manners of all would be improved. The jolly man brought in contact with the sober, the nervous and excitable with the phlegmatic the man or woman who has the blues with their enthusiastic neighbors, who see sunbeams and rainbows all the year round, and are quite sure that, as the sun always shines, there is no need of being in a hurry to make hay.But above all other advantages, would we place that arising from the association of men and women in common conversation. Now, visitings and callings are done mainly by the ladies, and men, particularly business men, grow into a positive dislike to doing either. Calling comes at unseasonable hours, and visiting is sunk to a fashionable middle of the night party with a supper at eleven. No wonder they hate it, particularly when they see in the prospective the like turmoil at home, and the same oppressive bills to foot.Just set apart this one day in the week or month-bend all things to it-just a little, (for it will take but little bending), and men will come to love it as they do their clubs or their lodge. Aye, more, for no men are to be found in any considerable numbers who do not like the company of ladies, particularly if they have a wife at home, who has floated in their minds beyond the fear of any uprooting the evergreens of true respect and love for the sex.Men would become more refined, delicate, gentle and amiable, for this constant communion; women more strong, noble and earnest to act their part well, in these private theatricals of neighborhood life, and the family reception evenings, or the "reunion" (as they are now called), would soon become to her one of the brightest days in the calendar.Don't be afraid your neighbors will call you proud and stuck up because, like the President of the United States, or the school board, or the bank directors, you have your special days and hours for disposing of this one of the important duties of life.Is not the whole detail of home duty as social to you and yours as the work of the President? Aye, they are more so; more full of deep and thrilling interest. They are the all of life to you, and must not be interfered with to their loss. Let your neighbor and friend know and that you think them so, and they will immediately respond to the same great fact, and live and act accordingly.Men never infringe upon each other, at least, proper men never do. Business before pleasure is their motto.Why should not women bring their duties and pleasures into the same orderly and harmonious arrangement? Who will try it?FRANCES D. GAGETHE KING'S DAUGHTERS.M.E.WrightA FEW days ago, in conversation with a gentleman, the "Suffrage" question was alluded to. He -- a man to whom schools, society and travel have given intelligence and culture, --opposed woman's claim to the ballot upon the ground that the possession by man of superior physical force, renders power his special prerogative. In a moment there came to mind that declaration of the Prophet, "The King's daughters are all glorious Within."Though at first sight this sentence may appear quite irrelevant, it seemed to me to hold within itself a sufficient reply to the arrogant claims above set forth. The idea of authority is at once suggested by the word King; and Kings' daughters are regarded as the inheritors and transmitters of authority. The ancient ideal of a Princess endowed her with dignity of presence, grace of manner and speech, condescending to the lowly, yet lofty to the high. It clothed her in costly robes and priceless jewels, giving unto her, in short, all outward glory. In these modern, more democratic days, the Daughters of the Crown may win less universal homage, but the mental image of a Princess remains the same picture of visible show. One mighty has said in apparent protest to this universal prostration before the external, "The King's daughters are all glorious within."He spake not of the daughters of Judean princes; not of the noble maids of the House of Pharaoh; nor, looking down the ages, did he say to the inhabitants of modern nations, "Ye are the happy subjects of worthy rulers, your Princesses,--Daughters of the House of Bourbon, and of the House of Stuart,--are all glorious within."History forbids the thought that this claim was made for nominal Princesses only; since its pages show that inward glory has been no gen-
eral characteristic of the high-born. In a sentence, written not for a day, but for all time, the present tense indicates a truth ever true; hence this inner glory is claimed for all the legitimate Princesses of all time. In the text, the Seer appears to look forward to a day when externals shall be less regarded, and inner power more widely recognized. The morning of that day is already here and its full light is nearing apace. There yet remain those who consider bulk and bustle as the emblems of power, and the sure winners of success; but, again, History is our witness, and testifies that mere animal force has been, and is, being gradually bowed out of place; and is already, to a very considerable extent, supplanted by mental force. War, where once the rule, is now the exception. Labor, that formerly required matured masculine strength, is now performed by machinery that can be guided by the hand of a child. As thus matter becomes daily more and more subordinated unto mind, in the same ratio daily increase the chances of those, who deficient in muscle, are yet equal mentally.This is emphatically an hour strong for the weak; it is the hour in which inner glory will outshine outer brilliance; an hour in which the accessories of power are coming to be less regarded than the essence of power. All men whose intellects have discovered the laws of the material world, and aided in subduing the elements, until they have become mind's willing servitors, have wrought unwittingly, perhaps, but none the less surely for this hour. All women, the inner strength and glory of whose lives have found expression in outward act, whether of benevolence, of art, or of literature, are the insurers of this present Good, and the true prophets of an approaching Better.We, in our "golden opportunities" but inherit the fruits of their labor. While we, as daughters of this most kingly century, claim our heritage, and reach forth our hands for the Ballot, which is the scepter of a Republic's kings, let us see to it that we can bear the test of the Prophet's sentence, and prove the validity of our claim, and the legitimacy of our title, citizens, by inner purity and glory,--i. e., by the possession of mental and moral strength. Let us banish from our discussions and from our appeals, all narrowness, bigotry, selfishness and jealousy;. and thus, --in our hearts and minds, making room for that all
gloriousness, --meet not o'er proudly, but reverently, that hour which even now is at hand; when -"Every bud of glorious aspirationMay blossom into power."M. E. WRlGHT.INQUIRY.Lavinia WalmsleyWHITHER tends the spirit's longingFor the far off unattained?Whence the voice forever calling,There's something nobler to be gained?Why so vain the aspirationFor a higher, better life?Why does ever dark temptationCome to mock us in the strife?Is there in the vast Forever,Freedom from this earthly thrall?When these temporal bonds we severIs there rest for one and all?Know, 0 Soul! thy aspirationFor the good is never vain:Know that wrestling with temptation,Thou dost nobler victory gain.Mother Earth rare truth revealethUnto all who list her word:Heed with reverence when she teacheth,Through her, God's own voice is heard.Action must strike hands with longing,Both be earnest, patient, true:Then the brighter day is dawning,Through the mist the sun you view.So when present work awaits thee,Do it with thy might and main:Thence thy fair Ideal will beMade divinely Real again.LAVINIA WALMSLEY.MOTHER'S RIGHTS.E. Burke Collins"JUST as the twig is bent, the tree is inclined." This is a self-evident fact, and the saying, though an old one, is incontrovertible, from the constant recurrence of examples which illustrate its reliability. It needs no stretch of the imagination, to picture the young tree, at first, a mere twig, which takes root and flourishes under the genial influence of sun and showers. But we know that, even with these concomitants of growth and verdure, if the training is neglected, its natural tendency will be to an unsightly and almost useless maturity. Consequently, everything depends on the training. Care must be taken, that its body grow not unshapely, or its limbs become crowded or unfruitful through a lack of judicious pruning. It is easily pictured, the tree which is uncared for, -- and the one which is cultivated and tended in its youth,-- and a vast difference is of course discernible.Just so it is with the human family. "Train up a child in the way be should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it," says the wise man, but a very small per cent of our children are trained by this example. The general system of governing the youth of the nineteenth century, is not in accordance with Solomon's wise counsel. The way in which he should go, is evidently an extremely devious way. At one time it turns to the right, and at another its course is directly opposite. Somehow, the poor child becomes entangled in the maze and labyrinth of windings; one day he is forbidden by papa to do this or that, and the next day his fond mamma alters the mandate, and Johnnie can do as he pleases. He soon learns a little lesson in chicanery, and when forbidden anything by one parent, he knows that it can be obtained by appealing to the other. If this lesson ended with childhood, perhaps it would not be so disastrous in its effects, although the chief harm in a little child's nature lies in its simplicity, and lack of deceit or guile. But it follows him through life. It is the easiest thing in the world to learn, and the hardest to overcome and forget.Said a young lady a few days since --"When I was a child, I always knew how to manage papa and mamma. If she refused me any coveted
pleasure, I would instantly seek papa and the boon was granted and vice versa. Occasionally, papa would be obdurate and refuse me what I desired. Then, it was only necessary to appear very much heartbroken, put my hands to my eyes and pretend tears, all the while that I was peeping through my fingers, to watch the effect upon my flinty-hearted parent. I never failed by this strategem, to gain the desiratum of my hopes, and,"-- pausing abruptly, and dropping her eyes evasively, -- "somehow or other, I have never forgotten it, and always find the little art successful," and she laughed lightly.How can we bring good out of all this evil, and error in judgment? There will always be injudicious parents, and children not easily governed,-- such traits are hereditary. I can see but one way by which this false system (or, more properly speaking, lack of system) can be renovated, and a new mode instituted. Let the mother possess the right to control her own surroundings; let ante-natal influences be of the right description, and there can be no failure. A child, born under proper ante-natal surroundings, may be whatever the mother desires, and were she as wealthy as the Rothschilds, she can never bestow upon her child, in all his after life, so great or so varied gifts as those given before ever his eyes beheld the light.Let men learn that, although created before women, their right to rule and tyrannize over them is yet to be proved. Let there be more equality between the sexes, and an ending to the system of brute force, which is rampant among the lower classes,-- yes, and it invades the higher class of society, as well as the inferior. We read, in our daily papers, an account of "a nameless crime," perpetrated on a young child by a human fiend, while the agonized mother stood near and watched the little innocent grow cold and rigid, and its delicate limbs stiffen in death, and was threatened with a worse fate if she dared complain, or make an outcry, against the diabolical cutrageoutrage and murder, because, forsooth, the fiend was her husband. Such things seem incredible in this age of enlightened and refined people, but although we would fain disbelieve them, and pass them by as mere sensational tales, yet our police reports prove them to be too true. Would such things be if the law were altered giving to the mother the chief control of her children? If there is any more right to rule on one side than on the other, whose right is it more
properly than the mother's, she who bore the pain and agony, and suffered beyond man's comprehension, and who, every day of her life of care and anxiety, feels the solicitude and fear which only a mother can know, for the welfare and safety of her child. Who but a mother can realize the feelings of her heart, when her boy goes forth into the great, busy world, -- he who is the light and pride of her life,-- the great joy of her existence. How she trembles as she realizes the pitfalls which are on every side of him, and her heart aches with terrible agony, as he leaves the shelter of the home roof, and bares his brave young breast to the cold world's pitiless storm. Oh, it is hard to know that with all the temptations that surround a young man, in the midst of the whirl and excitement of business, she is powerless to avert the dreaded evil. She must be quiet, and bear it all patiently, because she happens to be a woman, and "it is not woman's place to make laws,-- it is not her sphere." She must watch the open rum shops which stand sentinel on every corner, and know that it is difficult for her boy to pass temptation by unheeded, to go through the battle, and come out unscathed. He has no desire for the sparkling beverage; he knows, understands, and realizes perfectly the woe which the glittering poison brings in its wake; but temptation awaits him at every turn; he hesitates,-to waver, is to be lost,-- and he sinks into the drunkard's grave, while the heart-broken mother must sit quietly and see her only son fall into the pit of destruction which men have digged for him, and she cannot lift one finger to stay the ruin; no, though she would gladly give her life, if by so doing the terrible temptation could be annihilated.Men -- and women -- of America, must this thing be? I ask it in the name of Justice, and in behalf of our common sisterhood. There is that within my heart which tells me that when woman is admitted to an equality with man,-- politically, socially, and legally,-- there will be an end to this shameful sacrifice of life, which has become the great means of ruin to our country,-- ay, and the destruction of human souls. Then, allowed the privilege of training her own offspring in "in the way they should go," there will be a nobler, more elevated and intelligent race of people, with higher aspirations and purer principles and aims. There will be better wives and mothers, more faithful and tender husbands,
for the child is father to the man," and as the twig is bent the tree is inclined." Until then, we can wait.E. BURKE COLLINSPERPLEXEDGeorge JohnsonTHE human heart is strange; Its doubts have free exchange, And even dare arrangeThe Great Goodness in an unholy light.Such doubts come over me; I look around and see Things that I can but question--"Are they right?"No voice replies from out the silences, And further doubt my only answer is.The world seems full of wrong;The weak obey the strong; Rights, that to men belong As sacredly as love belongs to God, Power's ruthless bands invade, And men once free are made Lowly obedient to the tyrant's nod. Thou sayest, Lord, that vengeance rests with Thee, Then why so oft' goes the oppressor free?The rich have wealth increased;And foremost at the feast Sit those who gathered least, Through all the busy Summer's heat and dust. The peasant whose sad toil Secured the harvest spoil, Stands humbly waiting for the broken crust, And when the revel of his lord is o'er,Receives his mite, nor dares to ask for more.Has good its sure reward?In strife 'gainst error's sword Truth's champions have poured Their reddest blood in vainest offering; And Time's best age has seen Man's fellow, poor and mean,Scourged, bleeding, bound -- a toiling, groaning thing;Yet lands that bind and lands that break the chain Have equal blessing of the sun and rain.The dust of strife surrounds,And from its gloom resounds The noise of Life's great conflict, loud and nigh; "God helps the weaker side!" Oh! then why does he hideThe signs of its sure triumphing cry.A whisper caught from the swift winds that passed,Made sweetest answer to my listening ear;Be still, sad heart; all things shall be made clear At last, at last."GEORGE JOHNSON.HOW I BECAME A CONVERT.C.L. JamesIn behalf of the "good cause," I feel moved to tell how I was converted from hostility to the "Woman Movement." All the arguments brought against that great reform are of an a priori character. I will simply tell you my experience. And to begin with the beginning -- I was brought up in an English Academy for young men, and regarded with much prejudice the American system of educating both sexes together. Two years of quite dispassionate observation have, however, forced upon me the conviction that the American youth, brought up in accordance with the apparent design of nature, are in comparison with my own schoolfellows like angels; while we, compared to them, were savages. The cruelty, the rudeness, the threatening, the cursing, bullying spirit, of the English schoolboy, is something to which I find no parallel among his compeers in this country. But there are contrasts more important still. The peculiar vices of youth, -- intemperance, unchastity, gaming, etc., are here regarded with deserved severity; while in England they passed for honorable distinctions, or at worst for venial errors. Of the state of girls' schools in England I know nothing, but cannot believe that a system ruinous to one sex can benefit the other.But my basis of observation was not confined to England and America. I have seen the system of isolation carried to its full
extent in Italy, with the result of making the women idle, superstitious, crafty, and impure, and the men dissipated, volatile, flexible, and cynical. Let it be granted that domesticity is the design of Providence -- and our opponents never let us forget that truth. Domesticity does not exist in Italy. In England it exists in form, but there is a skeleton in (almost) every one's closet.  Only in America do the form and spirit go together. Thus there is a perfect induction secundum magis et minus to show that virtuous men and women are best made by educating both sexes in common.My observations (all biased on the wrong side) have convinced me that woman cannot be excluded from any society of men, and that society escape barbarism. Frontier settlements, monasteries, churches governed by the male members exclusively, all suffer in their spirit by the exclusion, and are revived when it is done away.Now it is notorious that a medical student needs unusual stamina to resist the demoralizing influences amongst which he moves. It is known that counting-houses have a tendency to become dens of thieves; barracks, nests of ruffians; the polls, a sink of iniquity; the legislatures, marts of corruption. Is it an arbitrary decree of God, or a foolish custom of man, that sets so deep a curse on so many useful professions? Surely the last hypothesis is the more reverent and rational. Woman represents the conscientiousness, the tenderness, the devotion, the spirituality of mankind. Let her into our circles, and she will impart those qualities to them. And, in our turn, we, who now monopolize so large a share of human business, will impart to her our systematic, dispassionate habits and consequent intellectual force.For, if we suffer by isolation so does she. Isolation teaches her to make admiration her summon bonum. Exclusion from all means of mental improvement and mental labor dooms her to mental inanition.. It makes her a fashionable play-thing, ignorant, prejudiced, languid, trifling.  And with characteristic justice we urge the results of her wrongs against the recognition of her claims!  While the only common ground for man and woman is the drawing-room, how can man and woman be helpmates to each other? So long as this unnatural, unreasonable separation continues, man outside the drawing-room must be a semi-savage, and
woman outside of it a semi-fool. But let the two sexes go into all the walks of life together, and we shall have everywhere the spirituality of the one supported by the vigor of the other.C.L. JAMES.THROWN UPON THE WORLD.anonymousPART SIXTH.To those interested in questions of a reformatory character, there are few places offering greater attractions than the Empire City during that period known as "Anniversary Week." The annual assembling together of the members of the various liberal Associations, is not only a season of glad reunion for widely separated friends, closely knit in sympathy by common devotion to a cause; but it is, also, by the interesting character of the proceedings, a period looked forward to by thousands scattered over the land, as the Pentecostal time when they might blend the beholding of the wonders of a great city with the feast of sitting at the feet of the men and women -- the apostles of this later day -- whose burning words and lives consecrated to the uplifting of humanity have enshrined them as living temples of worship in the heart.To Marian and her friend it was a period of the keenest enjoyment. Inaugurating it by their attendance at the magnificent lecture already recorded; upon the following evening, after a day of toil at the "case," the two girls were among the first of those who gathered at Steinway Hall to attend the closing session of the American Anti-Slavery Society. The announcement of Wendell Phiilips and Frederick Douglass as speakers -- whom a distinguished Senator present, in his address, characterized as "the ablest man of the colored race on this Continent, and the most brilliant orator of the white race" -- drew together a large assemblage, filling the spacious hall to repletion. To many of the audience both the glare of fashion and the appearance of the speakers were familiar; but to our gentle Lizzie it was as though some fairy realm had suddenly opened before her, and the time intervening between the gathering of the audience and the commencement of the exercises was pleasantly occupied by Marian in pointing out to her friend the more
noted of the members, with the appearance of the most of whom, from her longer identity with the Cause, she was familiar. But we cannot linger upon this portion of our narrative, pleasant as were the features of the occasion. The girls saw many a form and face of those who, in former years, had passed through the fiery ordeal of persecution and won for themselves names, a grateful, rebaptised Nation will long remember. They saw Abby Kelley Foster, the once Joan d'Arc of the Anti-Slavery enterprise, wearing the heroic look and air of command, which not even disease, which had racked her frame, or the invalid-life of years, had power to destroy; they saw Charles C. Burleigh, beautiful in his simplicity and in the unconsciousness of his great mental force; Frederick Douglass, burly in frame, a  very giant in intellect, the Moses of his people ; -- all these, and more they beheld, and not less of wrapt enjoyment was there in contemplating the features of the representative men and women assembled, than there was in the listening to the eloquent addresses which followed, -- Frederick Douglass blended humor and logic, or Wendell Phillips' masterly arraignment of the Nation for its perpetuated wrong of centuries.But of that Anniversary time, the events which most burned themselves into the remembrance of the girls, were the sessions of the American Equal Rights Association, which they attended upon the following day, having, for that purpose, so arranged their work as to be able to devote the entire day to the Convention. It was a memorable occasion. Not now is the time, nor here the place, to write its history; -- but the day will surely come when, to the noble spirits who struggled vainly throughout those stormy sessions to prevent a departure from time-honored principle, the pen of the historian will do full justice, while the hostile attitude of some of the leading members to the unmistakable claims of Justice and Humanity will remain a source of amazement to posterity. Of the conflict which had been going on within the Organization since its earliest meetings, presided over by the honored Lucretia Mott, now unable to attend its sessions -- of the attempts by a few ambitious members to introduce a political element into the movement and grasp the reins of leadership, -- Marian and her friend better than the many knew. Well aware were both that sentiments had been advocated antagonistic to the fundamental principles of the Organization, and that
the journal claimed as the special organ of the Cause had systematically opposed a great measure of Justice and Humanity, and often, in the quiet of their room, communing together concerning the progress of this or that Reform in the outer world, they had deplored the fact, and mourned that reproach should thus have been cast upon so fair a Cause.Prepared thus, by a previous knowledge of the want of harmony among the members, for any warmth of tone or variety of counsel in the Convention, the two girls were less surprised than many of the delegates, especially those from a distance, by whom the real cause of the difficulty was to the last unperfectly understood, when it became manifest that even the opening session of the Convention could not pass without a laying bare of long-concealed dissentient judgment and suppressed criticism. Beyond the scope of this simple narrative were it to dwell upon the stormy scenes of that memorable occasion. Throughout it all -- from the first calm, temperate statement of Stephen S. Foster, revealing the causes of the dissatisfaction of a large portion of the members with the affairs of the Society and the feeling of the compromised position in which they were placed, to the subversion of all order and the angry war of words which followed -- our two friends, with cheeks a-flame that such charges should be necessary, sat and only prayed that the Spirit of Wisdom might yet return to that distracted Convention. Nor from their two hearts alone, the silent invocation to the Most High arose that May morning. Upon that platform, rent as it were by a moral convulsion, of men and women known to fame, not a few of the purest and, intellectually, greatest of the land were gathered. That the criticisms pronounced were just and eminently fitting to be made, many believed; but by all the necessity for their utterance was deplored. It was as though, upon an honored cause, a disgrace had fallen; and though in subsequent sessions outward quiet and apparent harmony were restored, and many excellent addresses were delivered, a dull weight rested upon the minds of all, which no glowing outbursts of oratory, or sally of wit, could wholly remove, and the May anniversary of the American Equal Rights Association passed into history leaving heavier hearts behind it than any previous meeting of the Organization.With Marian the occasion was one destined to be linked with another event  equally momentous in her life-history. Sitting in the crowded hall,
that afternoon succeeding the stormy morning session, her gaze chanced to be directed to the gallery of the edifice, almost equally thronged with attentive spectators. As her eye ran carelessly over the tier of faces, it was arrested by one group, a family party, apparently, of a middle-aged lady and a gentleman, accompanied by a beautiful, almost child-appearing girl, whose strong resemblance of features to her more elderly companions, unmistakably pointed to the close relationship of parents and daughter. But rarely beautiful as was the girl, with her magnificent dark eyes, richly crimsoned cheeks and hair dropping in natural ringlets over the alabaster whiteness of the petite shoulders, -- it was not upon her that the gaze of Marian was longest directed. For beside her, every slight attention or look diverted from the platform marking the man of the world and the acceptable escort, there sat one her heart gave a bound as flashed, instantaneously, the form and face upon her remembrance -- for she had not dreamed of him as near -- George De L'Estrange. Just as of old he looked. A trifle thinner perhaps; slightly embrowned by Eastern suns; but the same light shone from his expressive eyes, the same winsome smile dwelt upon his face, that Marian had carried in memory ever since he stood in the doorway of the "Home" on the evening previous to his departure. Little given to idle fancies was our heroine, and not to herself even would she have admitted the possibility of a warmer feeling than that of friendship springing up in her heart for George De L'Estrange. Changed as he was in character, in aims, in channel of thought, and in walk of life, the gulf was yet wide betwixt them; and while in the quietude of her chamber she had poured out her heart in gratitude for the work of elevation wrought in a noble nature, she would yet have deemed that insuperable obstacles lay in the way of any closer relationship with the once gay, wild reporter. But now, as led by an irresistible fascination, her eye sought and resought the gallery where he sat beside that beauteous girl, turning often to her in the pauses of the proceedings to continue their animated conversation, a feeling unknown to her before -- one strangely allied to pain -- took possession of her heart. What if he were something more than a friend to the girl over whom he bent with almost a lover's fondness? It might well be, for there was a gloriousness of beauty in those features of which she had dreamed, but never before beheld in
life. It was a face, too, whose beauty consisted not in the perfection of the merely physical. There was an irradiation from within -- the soul looking forth and transfiguring all -- which gave to the countenance its supreme loveliness. Never had Marian beheld in a mould, at first glance so infantile, such a sense of maturity and power. Had she passed her upon crowded Broadway she would have turned, involuntarily, to gaze again upon her; but to be thus brought before her, as the companion of one whose image had been treasured by her more tenderly than she knew, was to invest her with a two-fold interest.Slowly the afternoon session wore away. Never once, during those hours, that Marian was aware, was the gaze of De L'Estrange by chance directed to herself. She was confident that he had not perceived her presence; and very dilligently she strove to avoid glancing in that direction and to concentrate her attention upon the proceedings, but it was a wearying effort, and thankful was she when the Convention was declared adjourned, and she could join the surging throng pressing eagerly along the aisles and down the broad flight of stairs, to escape the stifling heat of the room and gain the cooler street.Just before reaching the pavement, separated in the crush, for the time being, from her companion, she leaned against a pillar in a little eddy of the crowd, hoping at once to be rejoined by her friend. As she stood there, deeming herself secure from recognition behind the heavy folds of her veil, her heart gave a sudden start at the approach of the party that had so absorbed her attention; and ere she could change her position to avoid the slight chance of recognition, a quick eye had noted her form, and a well-remembered voice pronounced her name, while her hand was clasped warmly and impulsively in that of her absent friend of years."Come hither Mina," he said addressing his companion, at the same time still retaining his clasp of Marian and actually dragging her from the throng towards a more quiet part of the vestibule, -- " here are two of the 'strong-minded' that must immediately be brought to know one another. Patience a little," he continued in the light mood of old; "As soon as I can free you from this press I will perform all the offices of the most adroit court functionary. There, I think that will do," as they reached a quiet nook, allowing the human wave to sweep on to the
street; "I may venture now upon an introduction. Mina, this is Miss Eveleth, of whom you have heard me speak; Miss Eveleth, this is my cousin, Mina Graves, of Washington. One of you wields the scepter in the realm of type; the other has a penchant for dabbling in mud and plaster; both of you have peculiar views of the sphere of woman; are as aggressive, independent, and man-hating as may be; advance, shake hands, and be as sisters."The careless, off-hand way in which this was purposely spoken, set the two girls at ease at once, and a pleasant interchange of words, in the few moments afforded for conversation, followed, when, with a pang of reproach, at even the momentary forgetfulness of her friend, Marian, begged her companions to excuse her, explaining the cause of her anxiety, they having first won from her the permission to call upon her at the office on the following day. Hastening in search of her companion, great was her relief to be rejoined by the gentle Lizzie at the threshold, she having been borne in advance of her friend to the street, but had returned to the vestibule to find Marian engaged in conversation and so had forborne to disturb her.It was a beautiful evening, and the girls, lured by its loveliness, were in no haste to reach the "Home." Very pleasant were Marian's reveries as they strolled along the walks of Madison Square, or slowly loitered by the old-time mansions, with their spacious grounds, bordering on Second Avenue. All the events of the afternoon flashed before her. How strange it was that Mina Graves -- the child sculptor of whom she had heard so much; whose romantic history, works of art, and wondrous beauty, were the theme of every circle in Washington -- should be the cousin of De L'Estrange, and that she should thus have the opportunity of forming her acquaintance. In a few hours she would again behold her, and in the indulgence of the anticipation of the pleasure of another meeting, the Iong walk was almost unheedingly passed, and in the twilight shadows they crossed the threshold of the "Home."LINESWilliam P. TomlinsonTo a cousin who said she could not respect a man who identified himself with the "Woman Movement"AH, pretty Coz, with kindling cheek And lip that wears that haughty curl, You little know of what you speak Who dwell in fashion's giddy whirl. For you, Life tunes its gayest reed,Your home, grim care comes never near;What do you know of Woman's need,Or longing for a broader sphere?But come -- your costly robes lay by -- And tread the city's street with me;Mark well yon crowded purlieu nigh,Its filth, its blear-eyed poverty.Ah, there your poorer sisters dwell,Close herded with the vicious, weak;What tale the lips all quivering tell!What woe sits on the shrunken cheek!'Tis cruel warfare that they wage,For right to live, for daily bread;Not all their wrongs hath printed page,Or tongue most moving told or said.Their foes are many. Human greed,The love of power, beastly lust;Wealth hoarded spurns their sorest need;The mill of life grinds into dust.And aye, while with its folded hand,(Not daring with the Wrong to cope)Society doth listless stand, --The jaws of Death devouring ope.0, Cousin, while in lane or street Such glaring evils we beholdWhile in one manly heart doth beat Its love for all of human mould,Shall it not joy to join the few Who message holier, higher bring?And labor with the Good and True,Whatever taunt the world may fling?Ay, rather let reflection's dart, --Whate'er be station, yet, or both, --My Cousin, pierce the callous heartThat hears unmoved the groans of earth.WILLIAM P. TOMLINSONTHE QUESTION OF WOMAN SUFFRAGE.Mary F. Davis[THE following excellent article by our esteemed friend, MARY F. DAVIS, whose able pen has lent such valuable aid to the complete round of Reform, we take from the Banner of Light.-ED.]THE demand for Woman Suffrage has, since the close of the late war, taken a new and more definite shape. That terrible event awakened many women to an understanding of the theory of self-government; and the energies that were called forth in the upholding of our free institutions necessarily find outlet now in this new field of battle -- the establishment of woman's freedom. This is one of the immediate causes of the revival, on so grand a scale, of the Woman's Rights agitation, and of the definite and imperative demand, on the part of the agitators, for Woman Suffrage.The "logic of' events" has brought us to this point. The assertion in the immortal Declaration of Independence, that "Governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed," has taken root among all classes in this Republic; and, as a consequence, only those men are disfranchised who are incompetent or unworthy to give their consent to be governed. Those under age, those bereft of intelligence, insane men, and those convicted of crime, are ad
Judged to be incapable or undeserving of exercising the rights of citizenship. All other men may express their will by the use of the ballot. In this country, a man can be deprived of this right only by some alleged fault or folly of his own, and consequently to be disfranchised is a tremendous criticism or stigma of the public on the individual. Not only so, but the ballot is at once the symbol and guarantee of self-government, and the privilege of using this symbol is an endorsement by a great nation of the manhood and freedom of its sons.Thus logically the question arises, By what rule are the daughters of the Republic deprived of this symbol and safeguard of self-government? Are they to be classed with the imbecile and insane? If not, what monstrous crime can be laid at their door which should deprive them of the recognition and rights that America grants to virtuous and intelligent freemen? Last evening I heard an eloquent black man lecture on "Charleston as it was and is." After twenty-three years of Northern life and work as a clergyman, he returned to the city of his birth and enslavement. There he met those whom he had remembered "in bonds, as bound with them," and found them restored to citizenship, and some of them were holding responsible and honorable public offices. "Then," said he, "I straitened up and felt myself a man. Here my head had been bent and my spirit depressed, for the right of suffrage was withheld from me, and if you deny me the elective franchise you deny my manhood." It is easy for him who is guaranteed in the exercise of all the rights of citizenship to speak lightly of the ballot, and to wonder that it should be regarded of such value by the disfranchised; but he into whose soul the iron has entered knows full well the worth and power of that tiny, voiceless emblem of self-government that "executes the freeman's will, as lightning does the will of God."It is not, therefore, as an end but as a means that we ask the elective franchise for woman. It is at the threshold of her advancement. It is the first round of the ladder which she must climb by slow and toilsome steps in order to reach the "perfection and truthfulness of character" which "are the secret intentions of Nature." She needs to realize her dignity of soul by being placed on an equality with all who share the Divine Humanity, and to feel the pressure of the duties and responsibilities that lie in the track of freedom. She must learn the lesson known by the
patriots of the Revolution, but which needed to be again burned into the consciousness of men by the awful tragedy of fratricidal war that "eternal vigilance is the price of liberty." Woman needs the education that the ballot brings, and the incitements to intelligent exertion that by means of self-government are brought to bear upon the free. Like man, she is placed here with the endowment of Godlike faculties, but she needs, as he does, the weight of duty, the attrition of care and thought, the monitions of stern discipline, to give these faculties proper adjustment and activity. No agency should be withheld that would help her to live the largest, truest, noblest life of which it is capable, for she is so placed, in the economy of God, that upon her depends in great measure the weal or woe of individuals, nations and the world. As daughter, sister, wife, mother, she needs both the encouragement and protection which an understanding of the sublime principles of a free government, and a participation in its affairs, give to man. She is guardian of the family and the home. Let her not become less than this, but more. Let her clear intuitions be directed to the broader family and larger home which exists beyond her own fireside, and she will soon come to see that her pitying heart and tender hand are needed in the redemption of society and the rectification of government. The guardian of the home must become the guardian of the State, that larger home which needs to be adorned by the hand of woman with the beauty of holiness.A loveless theology and a loveless government are both at variance with the principle of Good. In suns, and planets, and the drop of dew, the centripetal and centrifugal forces balance each other. In stars and blossoms, and the grain of sand, the principal of polarity is found. No where is there a rounded sphere without the positive and negative in equipoise; and never, through all the ages of coming time, will there be a rounded Republic, a righteous and happy nation, without wisdom and love, man and woman, at the centre and circumference of government. MARY F. DAVIS.Editorial DepartmentTHE PENNSYLVANIA ORGANIZATION.SINCE the formation of the American Woman Suffrage Association at Cleveland, no auxiliary movement has been more gratifying to us than the organization of the Pennsylvania Woman Suffrage Association, which interesting event took place in Philadelphia on the 22nd ult.Pennsylvania, with its grand historic record and general character for philanthropy, hitherto has been strangely apathetic on the question of Woman Suffrage. While, within the twelve-month past, extending throughout the New England and Western States, there have been a brilliant series of Conventions, agitating and illuminating the subject; no similar gatherings, en masse, of the people, that we are aware during that period, have broken the dead, night-like apathy of Pennsylvania to the question of EQUAL RIGHTS for Woman. Even in Philadelphia -- the city of glorious memories, and the home of LUCRETIA MOTT and ANNA E. DICKINSON -- scarcely more of vitality and interest have been outwardly apparent. But the work of organization, if long delayed, has at last been done -- and done well. From the ranks of the Anti-Slavery workers -- the men and women upon whom for well nigh a third of a century past has rested the burden of that great enterprise -- has been developed the spirit and germ of a new movement, consecrated to Woman's Emancipation. Out of that splendid material, a Society has been formed, comprising among its members the names of not a few whom the Nation holds in grateful remembrance; and whose labors in the new field cannot but be fraught with consequences as blessed for humanity as were their self-sacrificing exertions in years past. It is indeed an organization of which Philadelphia may justly be proud, and we predict for it a field of usefulness second to that of no State organization in the land. For the successful inauguration of the movement, Pennsylvania is largely indebted to the very efficient Chairman of the Executive Committee, Mr. JOHN K. WILDMAN, of Philadelphia, than whom the Cause has no more devoted friend. We present herewith a list of the officers:THE PENNSYLVANIA WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION.
President. -- Mary Grew. Vice- Presidents. -- Edward M. Davis, Mrs. C. Farrington, Mercy K. Williamson. Recording Secretary. -- Annie Heacock.Corresponding Secretary. -- Eliza S. turner. Treasurer. -- G. M. S. P. Jones. Executive Committee. -- John K. Wildman, Ellen M. Child, Annie Shoemaker, Charlotte L. Peirce, Dr. Henry T. Child.THE WEST AROUSED.-- COLORAD0.ONCE more we beg to remind the East that it must be astir if it would not be completely distanced by the West in the march of progress. Already, from the older States, the laurel of being first to proclaim Woman Suffrage to its citizens has been plucked by the infant Territory of Wyoming; and now, catching the contagion, Colorado, through its noble Governor, utters words which, by their lofty comprehensiveness and recognition of principle, might well shame the timid Executives and halting Legislatures of the States of the East. How cheering, how like a fresh draft of air from those Mountains, it is, to us who dwell in this reeking atmosphere of corruption, to catch such words, speaking the larger freedom of the West! In his recent Message -- itself a model for terseness -- Gov. Edward M. McCook thus favorably commends the question of Woman Suffrage to the Colorado Legislature:
"Before dismissing the subject of franchise, I desire to call your attention to one question connected with it, which you may deem of sufficient importance to demand -- some consideration at your hands, before the close of the session. Our higher civilization has recognized woman's equality with man in all respects save one, suffrage. It has been said that no great reform was ever made without passing through three stages -- ridicule, argument and adoption. It rests with You to say whether Colorado will accept this reform in its first stage, as our sister Territory of Wyoming has done, or in the last; whether she will be a leader in the movement or a follower; for the logic of a progressive civilization leads to the inevitable result of a universal suffrage."THE WASHINGTON CONVENTIONA HIGHLY important and interesting Woman Suffrage Convention, continuing throughout three days, was held in Washington, commencing the 8th ult. The sessions throughout were characterized by great harmony and an unflagging interest in the proceedings, the audiences steadily increasing until the close of the Convention. Among the well-known friends of the Cause present, by the most of whom addresses were delivered, were ELIZABETH CADY STANTON, President of the National Woman Suffrage Association, SUSAN B. ANTHONY, ISABELLA B. HOOKER, PAULINA W. DAVIS, M. E. J. GAGE and SAMUEL J. MAY. In addition to a large attendance of the citizens of Washington, quite a number of Representatives and Senators, during the various sessions of the Convention by speech or presence manifested their interest in the Cause. In an especial manner Senators WILSON and POMEROY identified themselves with the movement, and warmly commended the question of Woman Suffrage to the favorable consideration of the National Legislature. The Hon. G. W. JULIAN, whose voice is ever lifted for Equal Rights, and whose absence, on account of ill health, from Washington, is so greatly to be regretted, we rejoice to say, it is expected will soon be able to resume his seat and active duties.On the 22nd inst. the Joint Committees of the House and Senate for the District of Columbia were met by a Committee from the Woman Suffrage Convention, charged with the duty of presenting the claims of that body fur Woman Suffrage in the District of Columbia. The hearing was eloquently conducted by ELIZABETH CADY STANTON, ISABELLA B. HOOKER, SUSAN B. ANTHONY and other distinguished advocates of Woman Suffrage, and the demand for equal political rights was listened to by the members composing the Joint Committees with the most respectful attention. The effect of the very able presentation of the case was marked, several members declaring themselves convinced of the rightfulness of Woman's claim to the Ballot. Among the Conventions held within the year, that which recently concluded its labors at Washington may be regarded as one of the most eminently successful.WOMAN IN THE MEDICAL COLLEGES OF EUROPE -- AN AMERICAN GIRL'S TRIUMPHTO a very interesting foreign correspondence in the N. Y. Tribune of the 19th inst., we are indebted for much valuable information concerning the progress made in the admission of women into the Medical colleges of Europe, which on the whole does not appear to have been greater than in this country. According to the statements of the writer, who evidently has taken pains to acquaint himself with his subject, the opposition, thus far, in England has been successful. No women have yet been admitted to a medical university in lordly Albion; and scores of eager applicants have turned from the doors of English universities, to seek the opportunities denied them in the more liberal schools of the Continent -- those of Zurich, Berlin or Paris. In Scotland the opposition to woman's admission has only been defeated after a long and closely contested struggle. But neither in England nor in Scotland has the opposition taken such insulting, rowdyish form, as in the case of the Philadelphia outrages, which have inflicted such irreparable disgrace upon the American character. Woman has been rigorously excluded, but she has been turned away with civil words. The rejection invariably has been couched in courteous terms and, in some instances, the smart of refusal has been taken away or softened by the good wishes expressed by the Faculty for their better success elsewhere. "Defeat is always unwelcome," says the writer, "but it may be softened by civility."But it is upon the Continent, and especially in Paris, that the greatest progress has been made. In the city whose only resource from the autocratic pleasure of an unsympathetic, relentless Ruler is the barricade and the open revolt to power; of all the great centers of wealth and civilization, the nearest approach to equality by both sexes in facilities for acquiring the knowledge of a noble profession has been exhibited. This is best illustrated by the writer's graphic description of the final examination in the Ecole de Medicine, the famous Medical School of Paris, at which (the school being made up of students of both sexes) the highest honors were borne off by an American girl, who, although not mentioned by name, is well known to be MiSS MARY PUTNAM, daugh-
ter of the eminent publisher G.P. PUTNAM, of this city. We crave no apology for thus presenting her name to our readers, for it is meet that they should know how much one girl, yet on the threshold of womanhood, has done to open the hitherto closed portals of science and to reflect luster on the American name abroad. Defeated in her quiet yet persistent efforts to obtain admission into the schools of medicine in this city; two years ago Miss PUTNAM visited Paris, and tried there, what had been denied her at home -- admission into the great Medical School of Paris. It was au audacious application. At that time not only had 130 woman been admitted as a student within its walls, but probably no one but our plucky American girl had ever even entertained the thought of making such a preposterous request. But the application was not only made, but so stoutly adhered to that the youthful enthusiast saw obstacle after obstacle melt from her pathway, and eventually she was installed as a student in the College.Of her subsequent brilliant career -- how she lightly triumphed over every difficulty of strange surroundings, of alien tongue and prejudice of sex -- how she surpassed her companions, the choice alumni of the youth of scholastic Paris -- we need not say in words. Suffice it that at the close of the long and trying ordeal of the examination, made with a view to test every faculty and demonstrate the full extent of knowledge, the Dean of the Faculty, who had not attempted to conceal his satisfaction at the failure of all his efforts to confuse the American girl, rubbing his hands turned to his colleague, saying aloud, "Oh! Tres bien! Tres bien!" In the same class with Miss PUTNAM was an English lady, who passed a highly creditable examination, receiving the mark, "Bien satisfait," a high certificate, but, in the language of the writer, "for the American was a Tres satisfait,' the highest that is given, and the first time it has been gained this year."After this magnificent demonstration, in the greatest University of the world, of Woman's ability to master science, we trust that our American colleges will yield to the demand of the age, and their portals be no longer closed to the aspiring, knowledge-seeking, true-souled women of the land.WOMAN SUFFRAGE JOURNALS.The Woman's Journal, of which, in advance of publication, mention simultaneously from was made in our last, issued its initial number Boston and Chicago on the 8th ult., since which period its weekly visits to us have been made with welcome, clock-work regularity.There are now in America at least three apparently well-established weekly journals specially devoted to the advocacy of Woman Suffrage: -- The Revolution in this city, edited by Mrs. ELIZABETH CADY STANTON, with Miss SUSAN B. ANTHONY as Publisher; The Woman's Advocate of Dayton, Ohio, edited by MIRIAM M. COLE and A. J. BOYER, and The Woman's Journal, the successor to Mrs. LIVERMORE's Agitator, edited by MARY A. LIVERMORE, JULIA WARD HOWE, LUCY STONE, Wm. LLOYD GARRISON, and T. W. HIGGINSON.First of these in the field, The Revolution justly may be regarded as the pioneer Woman Suffrage journal of the country; and now, in the third year of its existence, exhibits, on the part of its conductors, the same tireless energy as when it issued its initial number. Its influence upon the public -- far less, we believe, than if a more truly humanitarian policy had been pursued -is yet measurably great, and it numbers among its devoted adherents some of the truest and most influential friends of the Cause. By its cruel, unnecessary opposition to the Fifteenth Amendment and the just claims of a long enslaved people, The Revolution has cast reproach upon the name of Equal Rights, alienated from its support a large portion of the people who otherwise would have become its natural constituency, and deprived itself of all opportunity to be regarded as the true organ of the movement.The Woman's Advocate (our second self by the odd coincidence of name) comes to us in a new form, enlarged in size, and otherwise improved. It is a fearless, out-spoken journal, and richly merits the measure of support which it appears to have received from Ohio and the West.The Woman's Journal, rendered a necessity by the unfortunate diversity of opinion to which we have alluded, has a high mission of usefulness before it, which we trust it may be enabled to fulfill. The logical sequence of the Cleveland Convention, upon it rests the burden
of justifying the action of that body, and of presenting the Cause in its momentous bearings, higher aspirations, and true dignity to the American people. Thus far its progress has been most auspicious. It has won, at the beginning, the respect of the press, and appears rapidly to be working its way into the hearts and the homes of the people. In all that goes to redeem the movement from the injudicious counsel or action of the past -- in all that tends to the elevation and the truer relationship of the sexes of all the great human family -- we wish the Woman's Journal abundant success. Respecting the literary merits of the Journal we have not deemed it necessary to speak, as its own brilliant editorial corps is assurance of excellence in every department. In its more than pecuniary success, scattered throughout the land, hundreds of warm hearts are interested as rarely in a journalistic enterprise. May every expectation be richly fulfilled. Laying down the pen, from this brief mention of kindred journals, may we not be permitted to indulge in the hope that, in the coming glory, already haloing the movement all sense of past difference may speedily be lost and that the Future, so full of hope, will see a united front of the friends of Woman Suffrage until the final triumph of the Cause is assured.MEMORIAL WORDSCharlotte Denman LozierOF women known and honored, whether in the medical profession or in any of the more public walks of life, few were justly held in higher regard than the late Dr. CHARLOTTE D. LOZIER, whose untimely death has been so mourned by the entire community. Not alone the medical profession, of which she was a distinguished ornament, but society at large, has sustained a loss not easily repaired. Although yet in the flower of early womanhood when her earth-work was completed, not having attained her twenty-sixth year, she had achieved a prominent position in the medical world, and by her high-toned and noble philanthropic labors had earned the right to be regarded as a leader in the conspicuous benevolent and reform associations of the age.For one so young and seemingly so frail, the achievement, the extent and varied character of the work crowded into Mrs. LOZIER'S life, was
something wonderful. She was a graduate of the New York Medical College for Women in this city, bearing from that Institution, by the unanimous award of the Faculty, the highest honors of scholarship. At the time Mrs. LOZIER commenced her medical studies, some eight or ten years ago, women had far less opportunities for presenting medical studies than they now enjoy, imperfect as they yet may be. A lady (who subsequently became her mother-in-law) had just established the College, in the face of extreme prejudice, and all its substantial victories were yet to be won. A young enthusiast, with all the qualities which make of human kind, if need be, martyrs, MR. LOZIER entered upon her studies. Her days were spent in the class-room and hospital; her nights were devoted to the pursuit of anatomical and physiological investigations. In that memorable struggle of seven years ago to secure for women students of medicine the privilege of attending the clinics of Bellevue Hospital, she not only assisted, but was the recognized leader. The opposition engendered by this determination of the women students to avail themselves, equally with men, of the privileges of Bellevue Hospital, at this time can scarcely be estimated at its true weight and deformity. Hundreds of male students in unanimous conclave had determined that no "women doctors" should ever be tolerated among them, or become initiated into what they meant should be as the mysteries of some black art, confined to a sex alone. The recent outrages, to which the women medical students of Philadelphia were subjected, if we may trust the reports lying before us, were as nothing compared with the obloquy and abuse heaped upon the heads of the courageous lion-hearted women students who first attended the clinics and walked the wards of Bellevue. But the perseverance of a few, -- animated by a purpose that would brook no human obstacle, -eventually triumphed. Nor was this the only struggle, in order to obtain a complete medical education, in which Mrs. LOZIER was compelled to engage. Other obstacles, scarcely less formidable, from time to time arose; and, while each struggle resulted in strengthening her character and enlarging the scope of her mental faculties, the continuous strain upon her system was at the too costly sacrifice -- as events proved -- of sapping the delicate powers of life itself.Graduating thus with distinguished honor, with attainments so remarkable, it is not strange that she was called upon to fill the chair of a professor in the college in which she had been a student. Such was the confidence of the public in her scientific attainments and professional qualifications that she passed almost at once into a large practice -- one that left her but little relaxation from the lecture room and the discharge of her arduous college duties. The choice of the profession had been almost a religious conviction with her, and she neglected no opportunity to qualify herself for a conscientious discharge of its responsibilities. No study was too abstruse or forbidding; no problem at all bearing upon the profession without due consideration to be cast aside. But in all this there was more than the desire for mere intellectual gratification. In the best sense of the term she was a reformer, and the desire to promote the welfare of others was ever the controlling motive in her mind. With all our worthy benevolent and reformatory associations Mrs. LOZIER was prominently identified, her quiet but unswerving interest in them remaining unchanged to the last of her useful life.From the conclusion of a beautiful tribute to Mrs. LOZIER in the Home Journal of this city, from the pen, we presume, of Mr. GEORGE PERRY, we transfer the following:"Her mind, though preeminently of a practical cast, showed much aptitude for poetry and art. In the former she has left productions which are characterized by pure and elevated sentiment, an active imagination, earnest thought, and considerable proficiency in metrical expression. Her public addresses and lectures were eminently popular and successful, and those delivered as professor at the Medical College, were of marked excellence, promising a most brilliant future. Her productions generally were distinguished for clear and rapid thought, a logical method, natural and effective expression, a regard for the matter rather than the manner, embodying withal, that unstudied perfect adequateness of the word to the idea, which of itself constitutes one of the high graces of style."Thus, everything conspired to mark out for her a proud career of usefulness, influence and honor. At the very dawn, as it were, of the strength and maturity of her character, she passed away. But life is not measured by years; and, although she went thus early, she did not go till she had accomplished deeds to ennoble a lifetime, and entitle her to the lasting remembrance of mankind. Brief as was her career, its high purpose and achievement suffice to rank her among the noble few whose very ashes blossom in the dust."THE BOSTON WOMAN'S CLUB.OF all the social organizations of the "modern Athens," to which the requirements of the New England of to-day have given birth, perhaps one of the most interesting to the visitor is the "Woman's Club."  Of this association, a full account of the scope and organization of which was published in the initial number of THE ADVOCATE, a writer to the N. Y. Tribune, whom we suspect to be Miss Nelly Mackay Hutchinson, thus pleasantly speaks:"The building rented by the Woman's Club is now solely occupied by women. It is in Tremont place, a quiet, dingy, dull little no thoroughfare opening out of Beacon street. The house itself is as dingy and as quiet -- the very opposite of Delmonico's. It is the picture of practical cosiness and common sense, substantially solid as Faneuil Hall and Franklin Monument. The carpets are faded, but the women who tread them radiate wit and wisdom. The tables are old, but they bear the newest fruits of philosophy. The sofas and chairs are worn, but the grandest men and women of New England have rested upon them. Pretty landscapes hang around, and Emerson's earnest face looks down from the wall. In one of the parlors you find a committee meeting -- a group of thoughtful women -- many of them distinguished in literature. All are attired in dark stuff dresses, with the whitest and neatest of collars and cuffs. Mrs. Sewall's dainty head and fine face are visible in one corner. Opposite sits Edna Cheney -she of the noble figure and genial philosophy. One little literary woman knits quietly by the fire, and the earnest, soulful talk goes on in total oblivion of diamonds, point lace, satin, and the like. Once a month the Club has a Tea,-- to which are invited notable men, as well as women. They have poems and speeches, and a childlike, piquant jolity reigns. Mrs. Howe makes out women like a happy school girl, and throws her sparkling bon-mots right and left. Emerson jokes with quaint boyishness, and the dignified Sewall bubbles over with humor. The ladies wear what they please -- which is generally a walking dress of some dark material. They have charades and tableaux also. At a recent tea, Mrs. Cheney appeared as Pere Hyacinthe, a character for which her round fair face and large figure strikingly fitted her."Afternoon readings and lectures are given before the club at short intervals. Emerson and Dr. Channing are soon to lecture there. As an organization in which obtains the finest culture, the truest womanliness, the highest spirituality, the Boston Woman's Club takes precedence of any similar one in the country."A SERIES of papers comprehensively treating the subject now prominently claiming public attention, viz., "The Legal Status of Woman," will be commenced in the next number of THE ADVOCATE. The writer, a well-known New 
England lawyer, having given his best thought to the subject, our readers may expect a series of papers of unusual value and interest.COPIES of Volumes I. and II. of THE ADVOCATE, neatly bound, will be furnished, postage paid, for ONE DOLLAR AND TWENTY-FIVE CENTS per Volume, by addressing the Publisher.LITERARY.WOMAN AS INVENTOR. By M.E. Joslyn Gage. Pamphlet, 32 pp. Published by the New York State Woman Suffrage Association.We rejoice that the Woman Suffrage Association of New York, copying the example of kindred State organizations, which elsewhere have been attended with such excellent results, have commenced the publication of a series of Tracts designed for the information of the people upon the question of Woman Suffrage.An excellent commencement in this missionary labor has been made in the initial Tract before us, edited by M. E. Joslyn Gage, the efficient President of the State Association. Mrs. Gage, in ranging over the varied field in which inventive talent has been displayed, has exhibited rare judgment in all her selections, as well as literary skill in condensation and arrangement of narrative. Turning over the pages of this interesting record of woman's creative skill, the reader meets with such well-known names as Barbara Uttman, Isabella Cunio, Betsy Metcalf, and others scarcely less known to fame; while a knowledge of the deeds of other woman inventors, scarcely known to the world, inspires him with added respect for the mental capacity of the sex. We trust that this interesting little work will be followed by others similarly instructive, and that their mission will be to purify and divest the mind of its prejudice concerning the equality and the full investiture of woman with all the sacred rights of humanity.As an illustration of Mrs. Gage's industry and the value of her compilation, we present the following account of the true inventor of the Cotton Gin, one of the greatest mechanical triumphs of modern time:"It may, perhaps, be unknown to many persons, that the invention of the cotton-gin, one of the greatest mechanical triumphs of modern times, is due to a woman. Although the work on the model was done by the hands of Eli Whitney, yet Mrs. Greene originated the idea, and knowing Whitney to be a practical mechanic, she suggested his doing the work. This was during the winter 1792-3, when he was a guest at her house, near Savannah.Mrs. Greene whose maiden name was Catharine Littlefield, was the widow of Gen. Greene, of Revolutionary memory. After the return of peace Gen. Greene moved with his family from Rhode Island to Mulberry Grove, on the Savannah river, where he soon died, leaving his estate much embarrassed and five children for his wife to educate. Shortly after this, Eli Whitney went South to teach in a private family. When he reached Georgia he found his place supplied, and thereupon decided to apply himself to the study of law, making Mrs. Greene's house his home."The great difficulty of separating cotton from the seed was at that time a staple subject of complaint among cotton-planters. To separate a pound of the black seed variety, to which the lint does not adhere even so closely as to the green, was a negro's task for a day. So slow was the process that it became the regular practice for all the family of a cotton-planter to engage every night in the laborious work; and the task was looked upon as so great that it was the ordinary topic of conversation among those who cultivated cotton, and a fortune was prophesied for the lucky inventor of a machine capable of doing the work."It was after a conversation of this character, which had been held by some guests in her house, that Mrs. Greene proposed to Whitney the making of such a machine, and upon her idea he commenced.The work was done in her house, and under her immediate supervision. The wooden teeth first tried did not do the work well, and Whitney, despairing, was about to throw the work aside, when Mrs. Greene, whose confidence in ultimate success never wavered, proposed the substitution of wire. Whitney thereupon replaced the wooden by wire teeth, and within ten days from the first conception of Mrs. Greene's idea a small model was completed."This primitive little model was of such perfect construction that it has ever since stood as the model of all cotton-gins, and the inventive genius of universal male Yankeedom has not yet been able to suggest any practical improvement in the machine. Mrs. Greene, through her second husband, Mr. Miller, became the partner of Whitney in the manufacture of gins."By means of this invention an extraordinary impetus was given to the culture of cotton. Instead of a pound a day, as was formerly cleaned by hand, three hundred pounds were cleaned by the gin, and in a much better manner than hand-work could do. The importance of the invention can hardly be overestimated. Every cotton-mill throughout the world that whirrs its machinery in drawing out threads, or whose shuttles fly back and forth in the manufacture of cloth, is indebted to Mrs. Greene for its activity. Every sewing-machine used in shop or private house plies its treadle more rapidly on account of Mrs. Greene's genius. The cry, 'Cotton is king,' could never have arisen had not the gin, with its myriad man-power, first come into existence."ESSAY, Recommending the Union of  Great Britain and her Colonies and the United States, and the final Union of the World. By Frances Vincent. Published at Wilmington, Delaware.The above thoughtfully considered paper, which has attracted a measure of public attention, recommends the union of the entire Anglo-Saxon race into one Nation,-- a great Anglo-Saxon Confederacy, with a Constitution similar to that of the United States,-- to the end not only that there should be improved political and commercial relations between all parts of the absorbed Republic, but that its manners, customs and laws might spread over the face of the whole earth, until all mankind should form one people, speaking one common tongue. Mr. Vincent has taken great pains to elaborate his plan for a United Government, and the advantages presented are sufficiently weighty and numerous to challenge the attention of the wise and thoughtful both in Great Britain and in the United States. The whole Essay bears the evidence of careful, painstaking investigation into the system of governments, as well as the liveliest concern for the true interests of humanity. Impracticable as the scheme may be regarded by the many, it is in conformity with the tendency of the age to bring all nations into closer communication and fraternal intercourse; and to all advance thinkers we recommend Mr. Vincent's aspiration and closely considered argument for the brotherhood of the human family.CLUB RATES. -- IMPORTANT REDUCTION.THE ADVOCATE hereafter will be furnished at $1.50 per year, single copy, and sent to addresses as desired, in Clubs of four or more, upon the following terms:Four subscriptions, . . . . $5.00 Ten       do 	  . . . . 10.00 Twenty    "	        . . . . 16.00We will hereafter send The Nat. Anti-Slavery Standard ($3.00 a year) and THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE, each one year to old or new subscribers, the two for $3.50; --The Woman's Journal ($3.00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $3.50;The Radical ($4.00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $5.00;The Herald of Health ($2. 00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $3.00.THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATENO. III. March, 1870. VOL. III.THE MARKET WOMAN.Antoinette Brown Blackwell(Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1869, by ANTOINETTE BROWN BLACKWELL, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of New York.]CHAPTER VII.THE wind had been whistling through every cranny of the house all night long, making every shutter and casement shiver and chatter like a man with the ague. Yet all this had not frozen the sloppy earth, which looked in the hazy moonlight like one great cheerless, unending bog; mud and water in about equal proportions."It must have rained in the night," said the market woman, as she stood looking from her window upon the dreary scene, while there was but little promise, yet, even of the earliest dawn. "Don't try to get up, John, till breakfast is ready. I'll rub away the rheumatism in your back with flannels and liniment, and your cold will be the better for another nap under this extra comfort. Michael will be proud to take the milking business all into his own hands.""Unless he is knocked up too, Susy. That ditching was a foolish thing to stand by in the way we did, with everything just at the point of freezing all the afternoon. You were right about it, as you always are; but I was bent upon finishing a disagreeable task, and here are the results.""0h, Mike will be well enough! never fear for him; and now, dear, try to sleep for two hours." The wife gave a last consoling kiss and a last comforting tuck to the bed-clothes, and went out shutting the door softly; carrying her
shoes in her hand that she might not disturb grandmother and the children. "Michael," she called under the window, "Mr. Reband is sick this morning and you must carry over the milk. There will be no time to lose.""Coming, ma'am," replied the Irishman, stumbling on to the floor hastily. This was followed by a prolonged "Ugh! the foot of me! Is the evil one pullin' at all me toes, thin? And what iver am I to do with the boots?"Mrs. Reband not waited for this soliloquy. With her two milk pails in hand she was already in the yard, and now seated on her three-legged stool was listening to that indescribable, jerky, muffled sound of the falling milk. To her it was familiar, home-like music, and not at all unacceptable. She had overborne her husband's judgment, and determined on keeping milch cows in Winter, sending the milk to a neighbor who carried it to town with his own in his milk cart; and thus for the whole Winter they were all obliged to be earlier astir than usual.It is rather hard, I know, John," the wife had said in her lowest and kindiest tones, freighted with a little inward compunction; 11 but the milk business is always profitable, and we are in debt four thousand dollars." So the matter was settled, and it is only justice to say that she never shirked her part of the daily burden, or faltered in her outward approval of her own arrangement.Poor Michael held his boot in one hand and nursed his swollen foot with the other, perched uneasily upon the side of his bed in the chilly gloom about him; and then in desperation he thrust in his toes but only to draw them out again with a smothered howl."Blame it! that's a touch beyant me, howsomever. I'd like to do the best for the woman who always does the best for herself, but I jist won't put me corns and chilblains into that boot!"He sat a moment meditatively, turning right and left uneasily as if in search of something to help him out of his dilemma. "B1ast that ditch! And I 'no time to lose, 'eh; but I can't go out barefoot, of a certain." Then he bobbed his 
grizzled head into every corner of the room, and plunged under the bed in vain search after an old pair of shoes; and ended by groping his way into the entry and finding the lantern, which he lighted. At last he found the shoes and limped into the yard, sitting down to his milking without a word of complaint, like a staunch old hero as he was.Molking was done, the creatures were all feeding comfortably, and two great tin pails stood brimming over with the frothy white fluid ready for transit."Now, Michael, you will carry the milk yourself this morning, and I'll have the hot coffee ready by the time you return.""Yes'm," said Michael. Yet he didn't stir, and his wrinkled face was twitching with tokens of speechless, desperation."What is it, Michael?"It's that ma'am!" said the Irishman; suddenly pulling off shoe and stocking and thrusting his swollen foot -- knobby all over with angry, red blotches on a somewhat dark and mottled ground -- out into the full light of the lantern which was standing upon the stable floor."I see! too much ditch work, Michael," said Mrs. Reband gravely; turning hastily off into the shadow to hide her sense of the comic side of the occasion. 
"It won't do to wear even that shoe just yet. Mr. Reband's old slippers are in the entry closet. Put those on, and then build the fire and pat the tea-kettle over the stove, and if Mrs. Reband is not up by that time do you pour the potatoes into the oven to bake. They are all ready in a basin on the table; and then, Michael, wash your feet nicely in warm water, and when I come back I will give you a salve that will help them at once.""Yes'm," said Michael, turning humbly towards the house; while the market woman, who had already put the padded yoke over her shoulders and hooked up a pail on either side, marched off with a long steady step and disappeared along the road.It is not at all disagreeable to carry even heavy pails, balanced as these are and supported from the shoulders," she thought, as the spirit of calmness fell about her in the grey morning. "I shouldn't mind bringing the milk half the
time if John would consent; but the worst of proposing any plan like this is
that he will bear the burden h1inself; partly because I am a woman, and more because he was born generous-hearted, the dear fellow ! He saves me more than I would save myself; always making me feel that I am crowding on a little too hard. Am I, I wonder? At any rate, this walk to-day is fresh and altogether charming in spite of the mud, and I shall insist on taking it sometimes. Who cares for the looks?"Her thoughts wandered off now into the past. She was in a grand old wood
under the stars, looking through the black, leafless boughs and along the trunks of great trees, which stood up all about her like immense forest giants. Her pails were not filled with innocent milk, but with mischievous maple sap, which sparkled in the slanting moonlight; each mimic sea of sweetness shimmering in waves of silver at every motion imparted to it as she walked. There were youths and maidens scattered here and there in groups; some, like herself, gathering the forest nectar into pails, going from tree to free and emptying every bucket, one after the other, with songs and laughter; stooping in picturesque at-
titudes over the little white wooden casks, lifting them, and pouring out the
contents in a mingled haze of glorified moonlight and shadow. Others were at a large open fire, above which, suspended from a great iron crane, hung a huge cauldron of bubbling syrup; and near by was a smaller fire and a smaller kettle of daintier syrup over which two merry damsels presided with anything but witchlike gravity, but brandishing wooden ladles about the ears of every intruder. The leaping flames shot their long arrows of light far out into the deeper shades nestled under the lea of every forest monarch; but only making the unreached darkness still more palpable. John was there at her side trying to take the padded yoke from her shoulders and saying something which made her heart dance faster and with more vagaries than the arrows of light dancing and about at random among the dazed shadows.Then there sounded a wild musical whistle which summoned them all to the "sugaring off." The whole company sat about the fires, each holding a new, clean, broad shingle for a plate; half covered with a cake of packed and frozen snow, which bad lingered obligingly on the north side of a great boulder waiting for the special benefit of this very entertainment; and over this snow-cake the generous presiding damsels poured the warm sugar, which, hardening on the chilly drift, was pulled off by willing fingers and eaten with a relish which passes out of life forever with one's "teens." How jovial and good everybody was that evening, exchanging sugar drops with looks that had mottoes in them -- as city youths exchange bonbons done up, labelled, in pink and blue tissue paper.John was brightest and wittiest of them all; With a subdued enjoyment overflowing from him which crowded Susy's heart to fullness; now with smiles, and again with tears which seemed more beautiful, even to herself, than the gayest laughter. He was one of the daring three who climbed the highest maple and bound bundles of straw, moss, and dried grass about the topmost branches for a beacon. She could see him against the sky reaching across a chasm of shade; and, rubbing his lucifer upon the resentful bough, the whole was wrapped instantly in a mantle of flame. The others did the same, and the three jets of light spirted high up across the almost black depths of space, suddenly putting out the stars overhead. It was very beautiful, yet the girl's heart beat painfully till John had slid down again and stood beside her with one hasty clasp of hands while all eyes were turned upwards. An answering beacon started up from one and another tree-top in the distance; and simultaneously there went forth an echoed shout which bounded to and fro like a ball, sweeping the whole neighborhood in its circuit.This sugar making frolic, -- remote from her now both in time and space, -- was yet an era in both their lives; for their love was as young then as the moon who had not yet rounded her first quarter and who hung her silver crescent over them in the East with a blessing for them balanced on either horn of her shining yoke."I have a right to carry the balances half of the time," laughed Susan to herself as she thought it all over and came back again to her two buckets of milk hanging suspended from her shoulders, "I didn't give up my brimming pails of fun then, and I'm not going to abandon my milk-pails now! I say who cares much for the looks of it? or for the waspish laughter of shallow-pated idlers? Every honest bit of work is as respectable for me as it is for John! Of course, I would rather be a great lawyer who gets his thousand dollar fee as morning tid-bit, or a merchant prince who does business grandly -- all at wholesale; and I should even prefer to write a clever book which would fill my apron full of gold at a stroke, than to be a country maid with her milk-pails trudging through a slush like this, all for two greasy little dollars a morning. Daniel Webster says 'there is plenty of room up above; but it is awfully crowded down below;' and I and I can't get up there! Grandmother taught me never to cry for the moon; so I shall only take care that I don't have to cry for spilt milk. It is just as profitable to turn one's eyes down on an occasion. Mother, the children, and all of us might be shivering now in a leaky old shanty, without milk enough even for the family to drink, John hustled off drearily every morning to do a day's work as a hireling, and all of us eating the hand-to-mouth bread of poverty and dependence. But I can be as good a milkmaid and market woman as any of them; so I am bound to enjoy everything as it comes and make the best of it. Here we are now at neighbor Hopkins'; so let them stare at me or laugh as they choose, or make witty jokes when my back is turned. I'm as good as the Queen of England, and very likely shall enjoy my breakfast this morning twice as well with a better digestion and a conscience just as quiet as hers."Mrs. Reband laid her hand upon the little gate, throwing it wide open and edging her full milk-pails through with care; but an annoyed expression spread over her face and her thoughts tumbled off into more troubled waters as she toiled along the path to the back door, her wet and bespattered dress flapping drearily as she walked.These miserable shackles that I can't see my way clear to really shake off! I should like to get rid of these detestable, drabbling petticoats! They are above my ankles, and yet they are getting as bedraggled as a fine lady's, who trails hers over the sloppy pavement. There would be little hardship to me in a
man's work if I only could be allowed to wear a sensible dress. Women must be required to make bricks without straw if they attempt to do anything, that's certain."This brave woman went on her way home again, cheerfully, however, in spite of her disabilities; patiently slipping into dry clothes on reaching the brown cottage (all this occurred six or eight years before the first rise of the Bloomer costume) and when the family met at breakfast that morning there was no hint of hardship in the wholesome vigor of her appetite or her spirits. The husband was able to be at table, greatly improved in health by the liniment and his two hours' nap, and Michael's corns and chilblains had been soothed into a state which was altogether comfortable and promising. Their darkest hour was blossoming into a rosy dawn; but such a dawn, memorable long after for its spirited changes!For twenty-four hours the Imps of Winter and the North Wind had been held in check by the sprites of the South Wind and the sunshine. All day yesterday the former stole round under cover of the trees, barns and houses to overlay the waters with an armor of plate which should bear up the load of pearl blossoms that dying old January was waiting to hand down to them as his last will and testament; but the South Wind stirred the waters, shivering the plate armor into malicious needles; and the sunshine gobbled up the remnants whenever they fell under his steady broadside. Neither gained much in the contest, and when the Sun disappeared, he signalled the Moon to hang out her flag of truce, which she did for an hour or two; but a rain-storm coming unexpectedly upon the scene, all the winds of heaven, girding themselves afresh, went into a pell mell strife together in the darkness. Hence the clatter of casements and the broken boughs scattered everywhere, which had been hurled about all night as bludgeons.This morning, at the first blush of dawn, the allies of the Sun fled to his protection, retreating at first with a grand display of banners; but hastily throwing up a heavy breastwork of clouds, they sank behind their fortifications. The triumphant imps of Winter shot their ice-tipped sharpened arrows over the world without let or hindrance, -- their rushing streamers of victory floating out from the North Pole to the Equator. In a few hours the plate armor of the waters would be thick enough to bear up a regiment of mounted cavalry."I think you may omit the marketing to-day, Susan, with a clear conscience," said the convalescent, feeling rather glad, it must be confessed, that he at least was exempt from duty. "It is freezing now rapidly and you will have the forlornest kind of stiff mud to pull through.""I know it, dear, but it's Tuesday. People starve on the warmed up Sunday
crumbs on washing days, and they always get up a fresh appetite by Tuesday morning, so if mother and Baby will keep you in a toasting state till your cold is broken up; I guess I'll try it.""Oh, if that's all, I'll make myself into a live mummy and lie still; with Baby for a self-moving rattlebox to amuse me.""And if John finds himself getting a little stiff in the back again, I can take the broom-stick and give him a good dose of movement cure," said the rosy old mother, looking more fresh and bonny than she did a dozen years ago. "Never mind us, Susan, we'll take care of ourselves!""Yes, of course, Mother you are always the mainspring of everything, and keep all the wheels in order.""Only some of the wheels won't go, you see, even with two of the primest mainsprings to set them in motion," said Mr. Reband, placidly folding his arms and standing up post-like in the most restful attitude he could assume."What a luxury to be a gentleman of leisure!" retorted the wife."At any rate, I've got a nice basketfull of school dinner all ready for the children; and of course, Susan, they can ride with you to the corner,". said the thoughtful grandmother, heartily intent upon the comfort of her little ones. "it may save two more hard colds, and some shoe-leather.""Yes; and If it's very muddy, motherkin, I'll drive on and leave them at the school-house. Mike has managed to hobble about and get everything that is necessary into the wagon, I see, so I can start at once. Put on your things, children, and dress warmly. Remember your comforters, for it's chilly now, and will be just like Greenland when you come home at night. Baby, do you keep a good fire for pa and grandma, and don't let the cat lie under the stove.""Who but a woman would have thought of that! Now is there anything else, Susan?" laughed the invalid, wrapping himself round and round in a blanket with great parade and deliberation, to the immense delight of the children, who found it difficult to come at anything but the tip of "father's nose" to kiss good-bye upon.So in spite of Winter and disagreeables it seemed a merry party which set out that morning in the market cart, and a -merry party also that were left behind.The market that day was as chilly as a rising north wind could make it, and though the stove in Mrs. Reband's division did duty heroically, yet its warmth was felt only six or eight feet around; but into this gloomy circle the market 
people crowded like doves on the sunny side of a barn, keeping up the comfort of sociability in a way that cannot be done except on a cold morning. It is
stimulating in Winter to break through the ice and take a morning bath; the wholesome glow which follows is worth all that it costs; so the social stimulus, which reacts upon a crowd who have been taking a zero air-bath, for an hour or two in common enterprise, is quite worth experiencing. All the ice of conventionalism is thawed away, and men and women stand face to face in the heartiest good fellowship; little rivalries and bickerings thrown off like the other wrappings for which there is no farther occasion at present.Mrs. Hawks russet face glowed like a purple sunset as she said good morning to Mrs. Reband, and dashed into a spirited description of how she got fast in an unusual quagmire, breaking one of the traces of her rather weak-at-all-points old establishment to her great dismay, with only a small boy to help her in her trouble; and uncommunicative Mrs. Reband went into the details of her husband's and Michael's ailments, to a dozen attentive wide-mouthed listeners, in a way that was entirely surprising to herself in the first cool moment of reflection. Everybody had a word of adventure or condolence or congratulation, till the stream of talk rose up and bubbled over like a fountain; plashingsplashing here and there, musical and cheery on every side, and they all parted with a new and more humane interest in each other for that one morning's generous sociability.At a late hour customers began to come in force, and to buy without chaffering and with all despatch. People must eat more in cold weather than in warm to keep up the circulation, which is one comfort to the waiting market-folk; and the sellers, with the thermometer on a falling scale, are as expeditious and liberal-handed as the buyers; and so nature holds her balances with an even hand, measuring out justice to all. She has a great fund of real impartial motherhood."Eh, Mrs. Reband, I had some doubts about finding you here this morning," puffed the lumber merchant through his thick muffler, while his breath went floating upwards and wreathing his bead like a veritable halo. "It is already so slippery that I have some fears of broken bones and a picture of spilled vegetables and notions scattered over the sidewalk. I hope your horse has good corks on his shoes.""Yes he has; my husband takes good care of that, thank you. He's one of
the merciful men to his horses.""Your husband is even more sensible than you are, and that is saying a great deal! I've found that but lately.""I always knew he was," she replied, laughing."Did you? I didn't know him till the other day, but we had an hours' talk 
then and I like him.""So do I, Mr. Verplank.""Well, that's natural. ha! ha! ha! Now fill up my basket and I'll be off in a hurry. Put in a little of everything you have!"So they came, one, and another, and all effervescing with good nature; putting out a delicate tracery of moral frost-work, crisp and spangly as the beautiful lace embroidery on a window pane on such a morning as this. Swedenborg  is right. Nature has her correspondences everywhere. Flowers and birds come to us together in good-fellowship into a wilderness of Summer greenness; but the glittering sheen of Winter has a more than tropical vegetation of beauty all its own, and all as light-giving as the wintry whiteness of snow. They dream at the Tropics; but men must do or die nearer the Poles, and life grows brisk and wholesome.As the market woman anticipated, this was a lucky Tuesday, and her pocket rattled a roundelay of satisfaction all the way home. By the time she had fairly started on her return it was Greenland extended sure enough; but in her quilted stuff hood, huge mittens, and warm wraps generally, she was as comfortable as an Esquimaux in his furs. At any rate happiness is in the mind, and not in externals good or bad. "Iceland, is the best country that the sun ever shone upon" to the Icelander who thinks that it is. But the thermometer must be at least ten degrees below zero to produce that most perfect reaction of absolute contentment. Perhaps at this time it wanted yet a few degrees of the required temperature, for the market woman thought as she jogged, bumped, and jolted over the frozen roads, now and then breaking through and plunging into the unknown depths; Now if only John is better, and Michael's chilblains are not going to prove too troublesome, it will be a very satisfactory day after all." But I am sorry to add that Mrs. Reband was not thinking of the pain in the Irishman's toes, but of the inconvenience of it.THE laws which relate to woman are based, for the most part, on a very old and a very Oriental estimate of her nature, her powers, and her divinely ordained position. We shall see this, if we follow the course of legal enactments or religious prohibitions from the beginning. When the subject of Woman's Civil Rights first came to be considered, it was customary to quote from the scholars one of the sayings of Vishnu Sarma: "Every book of knowledge which is known to Oosana or to Vreehaspatee is by nature implanted in the understandings of women."Caroline H. Dall. -- "The College, the Market, and the Court."CO-EDUCATIONM.F. BurlingamePROGRESSION depends upon true education. There are periods, when
humanity seems to be making but little advancement, but all the while it is becoming gradually educated up to a certain point from which it makes rapid and startling progress.Every reformation, theological or political, every revolution, social or national, which to the world seemingly sprang full-grown, like Minerva, into existence, was a long time forming. And its generators and participators were for a long period eradicating old prejudices, and educating themselves up to a higher and better order of things.All along through the dark centuries of the past, has woman murmured against her unnatural position, and from generation to generation has the murmur grown louder, and slowly but surely has she removed one degrading restriction after another ,developed and educated herself up to the point of demanding the rights of a human being.Education, true education, is the legitimate cause of the woman movement, as it is of every reform. All that is needed to make the movement a success is to educate the masses until they are able to comprehend the truth of its principles and the justice of its demands. Every person possesses an education, extensive or limited, true or false. Upon the quantity and quality of individual education depends the progression and elevation of humanity. True education ever carries humanity onward and upward, false education ever retards and debases. True education is not so much a cramming down of facts, a committing of formulas, as a thorough understanding and developing of our three-fold nature, an attaining to purity of life and thought, to liberality of opinion, and a forming of individual character. Let every man and woman attain to this and we would see the dawning of the millenium. God himself indicated the only method of acquiring a true education and of going on toward mortal perfection, when he created man and woman. Man is incomplete without woman; woman, without man. Seclude men and women from each other, and they become dwarfed, deformed in soul, and brutish. The crime, corruption, and insanity found in convents and monasteries, particularly when those institutions included a large proportion of the population, afford a melancholy proof of this assertion. Man needs the presence of woman to arouse all that is best, purest, and noblest within him; and vice versa.God and nature points to co-education as the true method, and it is wilful blindness not to accept the indication. Those families, where the
children are of both sexes, generally send forth better men and women, than those where there is only one sex. The students of mixed schools are more orderly and studious than those of schools restricted to one sex. The colleges which refuse to admit women do as great injury and injustice to their own students as to the feminine applicants.Each sex restrains and refines the other. Together, the nature of each acquires depth and breadth impossible to be reached when separated. In mixed schools, the rough, disorderly, vulgar habits so prevalent in "male colleges," are almost unknown, and the excessive frivolity found in "female seminaries," almost disappears.For the regeneration of the world, it is necessary that men and women should have faith in each other, and that each should be worthy of the other's trust. This faith and worthiness are acquired best by associating, teaching, and training the sexes together, as co-students in-school, co-workers in life, brothers and sisters in God's great family.The practice of separating boys and girls during the rapidly growing, developing and changing period of their lives is detrimental to the extreme. Each sex feels the want of the other, each has an innocent craving for the other's presence, which being ungratified, is sinfully perverted; each places a wrong estimate upon the other, each grows up with false ideas of the other, each learns error instead of truth, vulgarity instead of purity, art and concealment instead of frankness, deception toward the other instead of honesty.Only by being educated with woman, or by associating with her, untrammeled by debasing artificialities, can man learn and understand the wants of the feminine nature. The reason why many men oppose the woman movement is that they have not been thus educated; they know nothing of woman.Woman knows not the wants and capacities of her own soul until she has associated with true manhood; and the reason why so many women are indifferent upon the subject of woman's emancipation is that they are unawakened, ignorant of themselves, and falsely educated.The purest, divinest portion of man's nature lies torpid until aroused by pure, strong-souled womanhood; the divinest element in woman's soul is awakened only by pure, true manhood. Shall this spark of divinity remain unnoticed, undeveloped until maturity, and risk missing it through having the soul defiled by passion instead of exalted by love for humanity? Rather let it be recognized and cherished by co-education and co-labor, each sex taught and trained to look upon the other as brothers or as sisters.Co-education is needed in other departments beside purely educational institutes. The recent disturbance at the clinical lectures in 
Philadelphia fully demonstrates that. That disturbance clearly shows to what low depths of degradation men will descend when unrestrained by the habitual presence of women. Their corrupt imaginations saw sensuality where there was none. To the vile all things are vile.A firmly established system of co-education would have prevented many from becoming so foul, and compelled the others to be civil. For illustration, a class of men attend their first lecture in the dissecting room, the majority are honorable, high-principled men, but unsettled and liable to corrupting influences. With feelings of wonder they learn of the marvelous mechanicism of the human body, and are sublimely touched by the divine impress left upon every part; but an obscene though witty remark of a corrupt class-mate, - alas, sometimes of the gentleman (?) lecturer, -- banishes these feelings and makes a debasing impression on their minds. And this being repeated day after day soon pollutes the whole class.A class of women might be defiled in the same manner but bring the two together, and the corrupt of each sex would be compelled to leave their foul thoughts unuttered, and thus the class would escape their corrupting influence.In every department, law, medicine, theology, etc., co-education and co-operation would be of decided advantage to humanity. We are not only pleading and working for the elevation of womanhood but also for the elevation of manhood. They progress together, they depend on each other. It is time that men and women should not be arrayed against each other, that their interests and aims should not be separated, that neither should be limited in the exercise of the God-given power to learn and to labor. God speaks most impressively to man through woman, to woman through man; not through a debasing perversion of that which makes them men and women; but through the higher, subtler, more spiritual, diviner sexual faculties and instincts.M. F. BURLINGAME.THE highest culture has been claimed for women: it has been shown, that, for two centuries, the ideal of such a culture has existed, but has however been depressed by an erroneous public opinion. There has, however, been a steady growth in the right direction, which entitles us to ask for a "revised and corrected" public opinion. The influence of mental culture is a small thing by the side of that insinuating atmospheric power and the customs of society which it controls. -- Caroline H. Dall. - "The College, the Market, and the Court."OUR JOURNEYMary SquiresWE sat by the ruddy f1re, and the cheerful glow of the lightShone clear on the printed pages, of the book we read that night.On the street we could hear the footsteps go crunching the frozen snow;And fancied how keenly the north wind was sweeping the valley below.But cosy and snug by the fire, the gas-jet bright overhead;And comfort and warmth around us,-- from the printed page we read.And soon we forgot of the Winter, of the snow, and the frozen rain,As we walked through Silent Alhambra, on the vine-clad hills of Spain.We strayed down the court where the lions stand lashing their stony sides;And sauntered where kings had sauntered, by dark-eyed Moorish brides.We read the strange cuffic inscription, "There's no one who conquers but God,"Carved o'er the irregular columns supporting the galleries broad.We wandered all over the palace; we talked of its legends and lore; "Sierra del Sol" on the mountain, the pride of Granada no more.We turn but a page of our journey, and we list to the Switzer boy's song,And echo, that chases the echo all the Alpine hills along.And then, 'mong the heathers of Scotland we gathered "the gowans so fine;"We talked of Burns and his Mary; -- we sailed down the storied Rhine.With the Bedouin boy o'er the desert on our camels we sped through the sand;Right gladly we greet the oases, and in the shade of the palm trees stand.With Brahmins we gathered the lotus by the sacred Gauges' side:And were watching the Hindoo maidens start their perfumed lamps an the tide --When the voice of the clock from the mantel, called us back to the present again;To the coals that were turning to ashes; the wind, the sleet and the rain. And smiling I thought of the traveler, and the pleasant trip that we took:He over the land and the water; I over his printed book.MARY SQUIRES.JUSTICE VERSUS EXPEDIENCYF.A.HinckleyTHE Expediency philosophy is an old one and has many adherents. To the proposal for reform, to emancipate the Slave, to enfranchise Woman, to elevate the Laborer, it is continually interposing some obstacle. It says, Will your plan work? Is it the best thing for the country? In a word is it Expedient? And the true reformer answers, I will meet you on your own plane, if you choose, though I cannot but think it a low one, but I want you to come up higher and ask, Is your proposition just? Is it in harmony with the Eternal truth? If so, I accept it, "though the heavens fall."Now these two ways of greeting new ideas, when they knock at our doors, are illustrative of two widely differing philosophies. The one is uneasy and anxious as to results, wants facts, and will be content with nothing less. Hence it accepts the Past with all its errors, rather than assume the Present with its duties. Its ideal, if indeed it may be said to have one, is that which has been. The other leaves the consequences to God, and says that course is wrong and this right; I most refrain from the one and do the other regardless of the effect. It recognizes no argument for an institution or form in the fact of its existence. Willing to leave the Past to take care of itself it presses forward to those duties which are before it.Now to every one early in life come these two systems offering to guide the conduct. Which shall be accepted ? Certainly in the region of morals there can be but one answer. The one hair-line of Justice, so beautifully pictured by Wendell Phillips, is the only one known in that realm either for men or nations. Indeed, any compromise of the absolute right may be said to be the beginning of immorality. "It may indeed be difficult," says Herbert Spencer, "for those who have but little faith in the invisible, to follow out a principle unflinchingly, in spite of a very threatening evil -- to give up their own power of judging what seems best from the belief that that only is best which is abstractedly right -- to say, although appearances are against it, yet will I obey the law. Nevertheless this is the true attitude to assume, the conduct which it has been the object of all moral teaching to inculcate; the only conduct which can eventually answer." Nor are facts wanting for those who must have them to prove that any departure from this rule is pernicious in its results. The history of our own country from its foundation to this moment, shows how all the compromises with slavery, always made in the name of expediency, have been its curse. Witness, the entire South for years unsafe to the tread of men with Northern ideas. Wit-
ness, the Boston Court House in chains. Witness Kansas. Witness the Rebellion itself, -- all the logical sequence of sacrificing the conscience of the Nation to what seemed the interests of commerce and the Union. So with our great men. The Statesman of Marshfield fell when he gave up principle in the blind hope of reaching the presidency, and the minister who would send his own mother into slavery if thereby he could weld the States more strongly together, had to smother the conscience God had given him before he could propose so inhuman a deed. What then in the light of this teaching must we say? Just this: That governments cannot endure in peace if founded on injustice. That the man who gives up character gives up all. In the face of this sublime truth, how small seems the prating against new causes, simply because they are innovations. Garrison and his associates for their fidelity to this exact justice were denounced as infidels and madmen; but impartial history is already proclaiming them the prophets of their era. The church, then as now the custodian of traditions, trod under foot the golden rule and substituted for it the rule of Slavery, commanding men to gag their lips and close their hearts against the appeals of a suffering humanity. Any opposition to this command was declared infidelity to God. Then, as now, they were called infidels who dissented from existing systems and customs, but the real infidels in all time are those who distrust the consequence of doing right. Truth, says Emerson, is the summit of being. Justice, its application to affairs. How few there are who have faith in this Truth as applicable to every-day life. Does some one propose Emancipation, or Universal Suffrage, or Labor Reform? Vain dreamer, impracticable theorizer, is the taunt with which he is met. Why not let well enough alone? Why make such a perpetual agitation? We always have got along well without it, why change now? To all such objections there can be but one answer. In the light of Progress new Truth is continually breaking forth, and man's first duty is to apply it to human affairs. So he be worthy, spite of timid cries of expediency on the one hand or infidelity on the other, this duty will be done. And, the true glory of such publications as THE ADVOCATE is that in answer to the divine summons in the soul of man, they rear their standards for Justice. Not for what the world calls the expedient thing, but what conscience says is the right thing. When people have accepted this new gospel, but not until then, it will be time to sing "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace and good will to men."F. A. HINCKLEY.THE LEGAL STATUS OF WOMANFIRST PAPERTHERE are certain things in the history of mankind which act as gauges of civilization; certain fundamental features which serve as threads, as it were, with which to weave the great web of historic development. Of such as these is the position of Woman. Her condition in society is an index to its progress; and this index is preserved by society in its laws. Corresponding with the measured advance of Man from an age of brute force and barbarism to a state of refinement and civilization, that chapter of the law which pertains to Woman is one continuous record of a struggling progress on her part, from out of a life of legal darkness to one of jural light; from a state of legal nonentity, under an earlier order of things, to one of legal recognition as an individual in a newer era. The legal status of Woman, therefore, especially at this time, becomes an interesting and important study; and its free and candid discussion can certainly be productive of no harm.At the outset we naturally inquire as to the origin of the disabilities to which Woman has been, and is subject, under our laws. Their source may be found in the early paternal power. Ancient law took no cognizance of individuals, but contemplated families only. Within the precincts of the primitive family, the father reigned supreme. No law interfered with his prerogative of absolute power. It was, as Homer makes Ulysses say in describing the Cyclops, a state in which "every one gives judgment to his children and wives." The legal existence of woman, as a daughter, was entirely absorbed in that of the father. He could kill, sell, and punish her; and she could legally do or have nothing separate from him. He could, of course, then, dispose or her in marriage to whom, and in the manner he saw fit. If he bargained her to any particular person, he might say, as did Egeus of his daughter Hermia -- "As she is mine I may dispose her;Which shall be either to this gentlemanOr to her death."By her sale in marriage he relinquished all his right to and over her, and she passed within the power which subjected her to the same condition of servitude that had been her lot as a daughter. It was merely a change of masters. In fact she became legally the daughter

of her husband and sister to her own children. Whether we regard her as wife or daughter, then,' her legal existence was merged in the patrae potestas.Man, it may be observed, occupies a like position under this power of the father. It has been one of the great works of civilization to develop both Man and Woman from out of this aggregate condition of servitude towards a position of complete individual liberty. In this progressive development, Man has ever been centuries in advance of his more luckless sister. This fact is to a great extent owing to the all prominent position which war held in earlier ages. Were time and space to permit, the earlier laws which penetrated within the family dominion in favor of the individual Man, could be traced to this source for their origin. In the feudal system, which was one of the bridges between the ancient and modern world, we see plainly interwoven this same feature. This reason, while it has thus operated in favor of Man, would have a tendency to retard the progress of Woman; and it has not even yet ceased to be used as an argument against her. This, too, has made the broad line of demarcation between the public and private rights of Woman. And hence the rights which appertain to her private station come first to be discussed and recognized.We notice at once something similar in the positions of the wife under the ancient power and under our common law ; but we see much less similarity in the two cases in the status of single women. For the reasons of this distinction we must look to the Roman, Canon and Civil Law. With the wonderful advancement of the Roman Jurisprudence, Woman had attained, during the later days of the Empire, a position of great freedom. The jurisconsults had evidently considered the equality of the sexes as a part of their code, and the iron barriers of the earlier patrae potestas had been greatly broken down in favor of both. But with the downfall of the Empire, the more refined rules of the Roman law came in contact with the ruder customs of the conquering hordes. Among the latter, in somewhat a decayed form, was the ancient stringent guardianship of Woman. Actuated, doubtless, by a good intent, the Church adopted this custom in its code of laws; and thus, in the Canon law and in the Civil law, were built up side by side two systems of rules which belonged to entirely different ages to the deep injury of civilization. As a result, we have the difference in our Common law as to the rules fixing the status of married and single women. Those governing the latter followed the Civil law, while those concerning the former were derived from the Canon law. Woman, under the Common law, may live, therefore, in two distinct periods of her legal development from the power in the ancient family. If she remain single, she occupies the

advanced stage and may enjoy the utmost legal freedom as an individual, so far as concerns contracts, and the like. If she marry, she enters upon a period much more closely connected with the rigid power which belongs to an age of barbarism. Significant of the nearness of this connection in the latter case is the fact, that the same terms are employed to express her condition in both instances. "Children," says Archaic law, "are under the power of the husband." And any one familiar with the law will recall many expressions illustrating this truth. To the same effect are the laws governing the husband and wife. The legal existence of the wife is, for most purposes, merged in that of the husband; and from this merger spring those stern and semi-barbarous rules, which, looked at abstractly, we can hardly help admiring for their logical consistency. Thus, on the one hand, all contracts previously made between the parties are dissolved by the marriage; all property which the wife may have possessed as a single woman passes under the control of the husband; the domicil of the wife cannot, any more than her existence, be separate from that of the husband; being one, they of course cannot contract with one another, and he being that one, she of necessity can make no contracts at all. For a like reason they can make no gifts to one another, as she can have nothing to give, and he would be merely giving to himself; and no third person can give to her, as it would be giving to the husband only. Her time, like herself, belongs to him, and consequently all her earnings go to fill his purse. From this same unity sprung the rule that the husband and wife cannot testify for or against each other, it being a maxim of the Common law, that no one can testify in his own behalf. Any children of the marriage could but follow this absorbing centralism, and their custody and service, therefore, belong to the husband. And should there be any dispute in the domestic forum, his will is law, and, according to some writers, personal chastisement may be inflicted for its enforcement; while her disobedience is considered a species of treason. On the other hand, if the husband is entitled to the benefits previously accrued to the wife, he also subjects himself to any of her liabilities, whether of contract or tort. As the wife's domicil must follow that or the husband, he is obliged to provide her with a home. He being the only one able to contract and to receive the family income, he is bound to provide for the proper support and maintenance of the wife. Not being entitled to the earnings of her children, the wife is not liable for their support, this duty resting on the husband. And as she is obliged to yield her obedience and trust to him, he in his turn is to afford her protectionAlthough under this system the condition of the wife was a continuation of her position under the ancient power, and was so closely connected with it as to receive the same name, yet it was with many modifications of some of the harsher features, as could but be the case with an improved state of society. This improvement, it will be observed, had taken place in two ways: First, some -restrictions had been placed on the husband's power, and in the same degree had the individuality of the wife been recognized. Thus, his power no longer extended to life and death; and his right of personal chastisement "was confined within reasonable bounds. So, too, his right to much of her property was reduced to, at most, but a life interest; and she was even allowed to make certain contracts for necessaries -- the law justifying the consistency of this by presuming the husband to be the real contractor, and the wife to be only an agent, whether this was true in fact or not. And second, the law endeavored to compensate the wife for the refusal to recognize her rights as an individual, by imposing on the husband certain duties, some of which have been mentioned; and in this way of balancing the system, its perfection was thought to be nearly attained. "For her disabilities," says Putnam, J., (in Gregory v. Paul, 15 Mass. 31), "the wife is liberally recompensed by the obligations which the marriage imposes upon the husband;" "and even these disabilities," says Blackstone, in closing his chapter on husband and wife, "are for the most part intended for her protection and benefit, so great a favorite is the female sex of the laws of England."The earnestness with which the rules of the Common law relating to married women have been upheld, as being founded in justice and reason, tenders this a remarkable illustration of how men will reason themselves into sincerely believing that error is truth. And therefore it is, that many of whom we would have reason to expect different things, have used their influence to prevent any further reform in the legal status of woman. But reform was just as sure to take place as right is in the end to triumph over wrong, and some advance has been made, therefore, in spite of opposition. To notice something of this progress will be the purpose of the next paper.IN Mary Russell Mitford's Life, just published by the Harpers, Miss Mitford makes this curious remark about Margaret Fuller: "They say she was insupportable at Boston, but became better at New York, where she was treated only as a lion; better still at Paris, where she knew a little French; still better in England, where she was talked over by Carlyle; and really good and interesting in Italy, where the womman took completely the place of the sibyl."THE MINISTRY OF DREAMSAugusta Cooper BristolSHE was akin to moonlight, -coldly fair, With silver clearness in her deep brown eyes. A curve of gathered firmness at her mouth, Bespoke a consciousness of special worth; Of virtue that had never slipped in deed, Or word, or thought; of an integrity That never stumbled in the social hedge, Or through the narrow chinks of worldly law, Caught at a starbeam. If an erring one Crossed the life-path she trode so royally, Her soul lost not its lofty equipoise By epithet or frown; but all her face Grew dreadful with the meaning of the word, Which men call "Justice." Once when slumber layFull softly on her veined and glossy lids,And the white pillow of her bosom heavedWith breathings calm, -the roguish sprite of dreamsWrought miracles within her passive soul.Or rather, it may be, an angel stooped,And fed her raptured fancy; knowing wellThe wisdom of his work. For in her dreamWas one love-lighted face with lips love warm,That fashioned words of unthought tenderness,Charming her willing heart to ecstacy.A face that law and honor had forbadeHer eye to look upon with thought of love.But in the world of dreams, the moral codeOn which she firmly based her virtuous strength,Was found no longer in her memory.And when she wakened from that summer landOf wildering vision, she was all too frailTo lift her spirit into temperate heightsOf purest rectitude; but weakly sunnedHer human spirit in the tropic warmthOf the forbidden dream.Full close withinThe red leaves of her heart, she hid her fault;Yet ever after, when some spirit frail,Tempted and erring, chanced to cross her way, The conscious blush rose to her ivory cheek; For one who wrote in silence in the sand, Seemed looking at her in a grieved surprise. Then the dread firmness at her mouth gave wayTo lines of pity, and the look she woreHeld mercy in its meaning. Evermore, The aura of her soul was warm and brightWith cheerful sympathy, and made her lifeA blessing and a glory to the world.AUGUSTA COOPER BRISTOL.SUFFRAGE FOR WOMEN.Frances Dana GageTHE rapidly increasing favor with which the idea of "Right of Suffrage for Women" is received, is calling out all the objections that can be thought of from those who oppose the measure.Some of these objections -- we will not call them arguments -- are so frivolous and unreasoning that one could hardly consent to spend the time to answer them, or notice them did they not proceed in the main from the same high source from which in olden time came the "Blue Laws" of Connecticut, the hanging, drowning and burnings of witches and Quakers, (i.e.) from the Reverends and Political leaders.They gravely assert, that "Adam was created first, then Eve," -- Therefore, women should not vote. (Was not the baboon created before Adam?)That man is stronger, larger of bone and muscle, -- Therefore, women should not vote. (Are not oxoe stronger and heavier than men?)Man has more brain, more courage, more persistance -- Therefore, women should not vote. (Has not an elephant more brains, a lion more courage, a beaver more persistence than men?)A woman never wrote Milton's "Paradise Lost," or Shakespeare's plays, or Invented a steam-engine. How many men have done the same? Should they vote?Then comes the profound thought, Woman was made for man, to complement him, round out his manhood, make his life more complete, keep his house, nurse his children, cook his steaks, sew on his buttons, and darn his hose, -- Therefore, she ought not to vote.That God in his infinite wisdom and power has placed insurmounta-

ble barriers between the sexes, fixed the sphere of women irrevocably; and if she steps beyond the insurmountable she will unsex herself, become mannish, and lose the love and courtesy of man, for whom she was especially created, -- Therefore, she must not vote.That men must go to war and fight and kill each other -- women cannot go -- Therefore, women must not vote. (Did Horace Greeley, Rev. Bushnell or John Todd ever fight or kill anybody?) It would be an expense to the nation to register the women of the country, and add to the burden of the national debt, -- Therefore, women should not vote. (Do they not help pay the taxes?)It would only double the vote and complicate the national machinery, and be of no use, for man and wife would vote alike,-Therefore, women should not vote. (Do not father and son often vote alike?)It would create contention in families, -- Therefore, women should not vote. (Are men so tyrannical that they will not permit free thoughts?)Woman must live, and move, and have her being in her husband, -- Therefore she cannot vote. (Do not women often live, and move, and have their being without a husband?)The man and wife are one, -- Therefore woman should not vote. (Are they not often distinctly two?)But we have done with these objections; all of which we have seen set forth in reputable journals within the years of 1868-9, as reasons why the right of suffrage should not be granted to women.What bearing does any one of them, or all united, have upon the subject? Every woman is an individual human soul. No man's eating satisfies her hunger, nor his drinking her thirst. His education gives her no understanding; his thinking does not develop her strength of mind; nor can his activities exercise her muscular power. If he commits a crime, she is not punished unless she aids or abets it; she is to all intents and purposes an individual.Sojourner Truth once said -- "If I am to be punished according to the deeds done in the body, I have a right to think for myself what deeds I ought do." This individuality does not take from the marriage relation

one iota of its sacredness; nor from the woman one jot or tittle of her womanliness, sweetness or purity.These troubled voters may pile up their authorities and opinions until they reach from my door stone to the milky way -- I will have none of them, if they conflict with my own conscientious convictions of my right and my duty as an individual connected with other individuals about me. They, the objectors, are of the same class, perhaps, that made the "Bulwarks of Slavery," until the people, men and women, cried out in a majority, "Away with it." When it became popular they were staunchly on the side of Freedom.Let us not waste time by staying to pelt them even with the stones of ridicule or contempt. Throw broadcast the idea of individualism among the masses, who can never be corrupted. Teach them that the right for one should be the right for all.When an American citizen demands his right of suffrage for the first time, he is not questioned whether he be a husband or father, a tradesman or mechanic, a clergyman or a rope-dancer, but, "are you a legalized voter?" And the right of suffrage for woman has no more to do with her, as a wife and mother, housekeeper or school-teacher, than with man in his several vocations in life.If the Ballot is the foundation of liberty and right for one sex, it must be equally so for the other, until that day shall come when no man shall be found on earth to oppress or defraud his fellow man, for so sure as his sense of justice fail in the one case, it would fail in the other if individual interest should prompt the action.That men and women can live distinct individual lives has been proven in a million of instances. That it is best so to live, has perhaps never been demonstrated.If men and women are better and happier, and the good of society demands they should live together, to bear each other's burdens and share with each other the vicissitudes in life, there should be no superiority or inferiority, their use should be equal in value, and no law regulating their social relations should give to one party power and dominion over the other. As some men are larger, stronger, or more intelligent and useful than some women, so are some women stronger, larger, more intelligent and useful than some men. No criterion will

hold good  for all, and only an equal law can reach all cases and harmonize all peoples.FRANCES DANA GAGE.THROWN UPON THE WORLDPART SEVENTH.IT was yet early morning in the metropolis. For the fashionable dweller the day would not begin for hours, but the toiling population was abroad, and the streets of the lower part of the city were beginning to be lined with the working classes, young and old, alike eagerly hastening to the scene of their employment. It was a fair morning -- for May comes with something of its balmy loveliness even to the pent denizens of the city -- and, doubtless, among the thousands, hurrying, perchance, to the stifling atmosphere of some dingy work-room, and to an ill-paid and uncongenial task, there were many in whom the wild wish arose to fly from it all -- the labor that shut them from the blessed sunlight - anywhere, so it was beyond the city limits.But not blither of heart was the feathered songster caroling its liveliest strain from a bough of one of the grand old trees yet lingering, on sufferance, in the scanty area of the City Park, than was our Marian, as, accompanied by her friend, she tripped her way that morning across the square to gain the work-room. Perfect health, the glow of youth, the satisfaction arising from a life of honest endeavor, all were hers. She loved her labor. Hers was a nature that could brook neither mental nor bodily inactivity, and, after many a day of arduous toil, the lines of the poet to her found fitting application --Something attempted, something done,Had earned a night's repose."In her choice of a situation Marian had been eminently fortunate. Her place was admirably calculated to develop every faculty, and wonderfully had she improved since the day when an unformed country girl, she sought the great city in search of employment. The large responsibility which had been thrown upon her; the necessity of acquainting herself with branches of study, with which she had been unac-

quainted; the habits of self-reliance which she had insensibly formed, had all tended to the full development of her nature and the unfolding of faculties which otherwise might have remained dormant. The paper under her charge was a weekly journal, not of the inordinate proportions of some of the great "blanket" sheets of the day, yet of respectable dimensions, carefully edited, and largely commanding the respect of the nation; and Marian had abundant time to discharge all the duties of forewoman, and yet carry into effect many schemes which an intimate acquaintance with the business had caused her to entertain respecting printing-offices, and the amelioration of the condition of women compositors. In this work, so eminently appealing to her practical nature, Marian was ably assisted by the editor, Mr. Lyman, who rejoiced at a at a change in his office, so in consonance with his own views and who spared no pains to promote any project receiving the sanction of his judgment. Very different, indeed, was the composing room, that neat, tastefully decorated apartment with its airy outlook, from The Universe office, the great, bustling hive of labor in which she had learned her calling. The love of order and neatness was a striking characteristic of Marian's nature, and, above all, the ceaseless whirl and confusion -- so inevitably connected with a great daily journal -- was distasteful to her. Determining that, as much as possible, these annoyances should be banished from the new office, Marian caused a few rules, simple, yet sufficiently comprehensive, to be printed and conspicuously hung among the few prints that adorned the neatly papered walls, in plain sight of the little force, of both sexes who daily toiled beneath her eye. As each compositor was carefully selected, either through previous knowledge or by that keen, intuitive sense of character possessed by Marian, but little difficulty was experienced in causing these regulations for the government of work and conduct to be scrupulously observed. Indeed, although Marian could be firm when occasion required, and those who accepted employment under her knew that every salutory restriction must be respected, her demeanor was yet so uniformly kind, and her exactions were so conscientiously just, having the best welfare of all at heart, that there was scarcely ever a rebellions thought in opposition to her decrees, and to receive the praise of "Miss Eveleth" was usually regarded as the highest possible compliment that could be bestowed. True, her position 

was not wholly without its unpleasantness of feature. The novelty of her station, and the paragraphs concerning her which, form time to time found their way into the press both of town and country, had the effect of attracting a class of curious idlers to the work-room whom it was not always easy to shake off as expeditiously as could be wished; but as time passed, and the uniform guardedness of the demeanor practiced towards such intruders became generally known, these annoyances almost wholly ceased. But beyond all this -- drowning the sense of the slight discomforts of her position -- for Marian, in her employment, there was a pleasure, the idea of which we may not succeed in conveying in its keen sense of enjoyment to the reader. The constituency of the journal upon which her labor and care was expended, although not large in the sense of modern swollen newspaper circulations, was a highly cultured one, and its articles and editorial utterances were frequently of a rare order of merit. Certain writers engaged upon it were especially endeared to Marian, and it was a pleasure for her to take the productions of those gifted minds, as the "copy" was handed to her by the editor, and enjoy the first hurried reading of the carefully considered thoughts of those with whom she was in spiritual relationship. For such honored men and women it was a pleasure for Marian even to put the glowing words into type; to see the eloquent passages take shape beneath her skillful fingers, and watch the order and symmetry with which the metal compressed the diffusive and, I regret to say, often less legible manuscript. The productions of one or two contributors, especially, -- a man known to the furthest portion of the habitable globe for his lips of eloquence, and a woman whose name as a philanthropist and as one of the sweetest of writers, lies deep in the hearts of thousands,-- Marian could scarcely bear to confide to other hands, and she always rejoiced, half as a mother fondling her offspring, when opportunity afforded, for her own execution of the work. Distrustful in the extreme of her own power to conceive and execute, Marian rarely assayed composition herself, but now and then, as a relief for overcharged thought, she had penciled some essay or fragment of verse, which, subsequently, had been submitted to some editorial judgment, and more than one gem of thought or poesy, floating without parentage on the sea of journalism, might have been traced to one whose name would never be known in the literary world.Are we lingering too long over the humble, every-day-life of our heroine? Not to fulfil any of the requirements of modern sensational romance have these pages been penned. Our purpose simply has been to sketch the self-supporting life, the pioneer career of an American girl, one who, unaided, hewed her way to a useful, honorable position; and without a slight lifting of the veil, a bringing of face to face in every-day thought and life, we would despair of imbuing the mind of the reader with a tithe of the respect there should be entertained not for some shadowy creation of fiction, but for the central character of these pages - Marian Eveleth.Upon this day of which we have spoken, there was an unwonted flatter in the breast of the usually calm, self-sustained Marian. Without seeming rude, she could not have denied the pressing request of both De L'Estrange and his companion for permission to call upon her at the office; and yet even at the moment there was a nervous sinking of the heart, a half dread of the consequences of the interview. She was so fastidious, this Mina Graves, so rarely beautiful and accomplished, so accustomed to adulation and the society of the cultured and the fashionable, what would she think of her in her workday garb, amid such surroundings? Would not her artistic nature receive a shock, and where she would fain stand well, would she not be regarded as an ordinary working-girl, and the highly wrought representations which must have been to her, accounting for the unexpected interest of De L'Estrange, be attributed to levity or the blinded perceptions of a lover? But by a resolute effort she banished such distracting thoughts. "It is a weakness," she murmured, "I thought I was above the indulgence of such morbid fancies. My friends, or those who would be such, must take me as I am. No one whose good opinion is really worth possessing will think less of me because I prefer honest labor and independence to eating the bread of charity."But little place in her mind would there have been for such forebodings, could Marian have foreseen the actual agreeability and freedom from restraint of the interview. Within an hour from the period of her indulgence in such reffections, while the freshness of the morning yet remained, and the gentle south-wind lent an inviting coolness to the flower-scented and tastefully decorated room, she was welcoming, with

far more of a self-possessed air than she had deemed possible, her visitors, and in the little recess opening from the work-room, set apart by Marian for such occasions, she was chatting away with them as unreservedly as though they had been the friends of years. That she thus passively resigned herself to the current of unrestrained sociability, while it was foreign to her nature, was yet a natural consequence of the position of the moment. Towards De L'Estrange a change had been steadily going on in her mind, caused by her increased confidence in the natural nobility of his character, disposing her to waive much of the icy formality of the past; and cold indeed would have been her heart, and insensible to the winning charms of a richly gifted nature, could she long have withstood the kindly advances of his cousin. It had been said, in circles known to Marian only by fame, that no heart had ever successfully resisted the spell of fascination exerted, at pleasure, by the child-sculptor. Statesmen holding the destinies of the nation, as it were, in the hollow of their hand, had bowed before it, and left the weightiest affairs of State to pay her their homage; scholars, philosophers, editors of journals whose utterances were potent, had united in the need of praise and vied with each other in rendering her service; wealth, commissions, official honors, hearts innumerable, had been thrown her feet; upon the gay, fastidious circles of Washington, from obscurity she had flashed as a meteor, dazzling all eyes by her beauty, her genius, her purity of character, -- for not less uncorrupted by the world, and its flatteries was the heart of the most convent-secluded novice than that of this rarely endowed girl, who had tasted all that adulation, society and fame could offer, -- Mina Graves."I have come to spend the day with you, if you will be so good as to keep me," she winningly, half-pleadingly remarked to Marian in a lull of the conversation. "My cousin has told me of half-a-score of appointments he must keep, so we we will e'en just remind him of the old proverb of 'three and the crowd,' and you and I will divide the sovereignty of this office for a day between us. Indeed you must, keep me," she added, even more pleadingly. "You do not know how weary I am of the crowd of the inanity of the great outer world. I came to New York for rest. In this great wilderness of life I can lose myself, I can refresh my faith, and I come to you, a stranger, for just the companionship I need.

You are strong. Your life is all different from mine. I know you are good and noble and compassionate; you can be to me all that I need; you must be my friend!"There was no resisting the subtle flattery of this address, and so it was settled. A few minutes more of pleasant conversation ensued, when De L'Estrange rising, gaily said that after the hint given he could not be expected longer to remain, and, with an assurance of calling, at an early hour in the evening for his cousin, took his departure.THE FAIR STANDARD-BEARERElizabeth Heywood"A still small voice spake unto me,Thou art so full of misery,Were it not better not to be?Then to the still, small voice I said,Let me not cast in endless shadeWhat is so wonderfully made ITENNYSON.So heaven has bountifully shedThe light of beauty on her head,And shall she wish that she were dead?With tender eye, and low sweet voice,A slender form, all perfect poise,And lip that speaketh words so choice:A heart that quivers, giving graceTo fairest lineaments of face,Where now a smile or tear finds place:An ear acute, a sprightly mind,A pleasing fancy, full, refined,And all "sweet influences" that bind --Heart to heart in the weary strife,The ceaseless war of human life,With vice and misery so rife.No! if so wonderfully made,Then must she come forth from the shade,"Walk in the light," as Jesus said.Truth calleth now a gentle handTo wave aloft her gracious wand,And gather firm, enduring band.Lest Error, masterful, o'erleap,Bounds where our Nation's sorrows sleep,And all her woes are buried deep.New evil now lurks in our tread,And the strong hand aye must be led,To see and keep peace for the dead:Must clasp in its palm the soft handOf the "helpmeet," and firmly standFor the rights of our Fatherland.ELIZABETH HEYWOOD.THE FARMER'S WIFE.Ilo PennTHE labors of the day are over, and she sits alone by the open fireside, busily knitting, and her eyes look into the glowing flames as it she were reading the very heart of the future: Of what does this woman think as she waits up alone, while all her loved ones are drawing quiet sighs of restful sleep around her? This plain woman, with her hair put back in a net, her home dress of warm plaid flannel, and apron of checkered calico. One would suppose her chief care would be the sock she is knitting for her husband, so untiringly her fingers travel round the ceaseless loops that stretch the ribbed work longer at every round; but though she has an inbred care for this, a love and interest in all the house and its manifold labors, though she toils all day cheerily, and never regrets the choice she made long years ago, when Love came and sat upon her heart like a brooding dove, and life's highest good seemed living and loving in the holy marriage state, -- yet added years and multiplied experiences have brought new lights to sit in this woman's soul, and as she sits here tonight, while the Winter blows his blasts of defiance without, thoughts of the past and hopes for the future are busy within her brain! No one who sees this housewife in the busy daytime, going from task to task as if her whole heart and soul depended upon it, would suspect what thoughts and capabilities lie dormant within her. For the most part she is happy and contented. Her husband believes in her, her children carry all their troubles to her, and her word is the law that settles all difficulties with them; hers is the hand that soothes and caresses daily; hers the voice that

speaks to them of the "All Father" and the "Promised Land." In reverent tones, and with confident faith, she points out to them the "beauty of holiness," until the sight Of their little, earnest faces, lifted in childish trust, never doubting a word that mother says, breaks down her own soul in conscious humility, and she looks with distrust and doubt upon her own life."Why cannot I rise to the Ideal that is in my soul?" she asks with bitter tears. I ought to be the woman my innocent children believe me." God knows there are heights and depths in this woman's soul that are not known to any, save her Father in Heaven! Sometimes a whole flood of waves come over her, and for some seeming trifle she breaks down into a storm of tears that seem to wash away all the old landmarks. Long shuddering sighs come from her very heart, as "everything" comes upon her weary mind at once! In these moments the burden of the world rests on one pair of shoulders. Dear God! after all, the best of us are but babes, we cannot carry all the troubles that come upon us. But sometimes we can wash them away with our tears! For, after a night of such weeping, as no man can understand nor comfort, this woman rises in the morning brighter than ever; rises to her toils and little cares cheerfully, smiling as if she had "rained her sky clear again," in very truth. She goes to church and joins in the earnest voice of praise, that hymns its way upon the still country air; but the timid soul never gives itself vent in any other way in public. The burden of ages is upon her, and the words of the old Apostle are drilled into her very soul: "It is a shame for a woman to speak;" and though she is conscious of a power -- if she only dared use it -- that could soar as a lark to the very gates of Heaven, in earnest prayer that might melt the hearts of all by tender, magnetic speech, yet she sits still, a very coward, while possessing many of the attributes of courage and power. Behold what custom and law can do! Who can say what this human soul might have done had there been no difference in the education, in the training of the minds of brothers and sisters all over the land? This woman knows as much of politics, of law, and of the great movements of the age, as her husband, her father, or any of her brothers; but you would never guess it from her words save some chance might reveal it, -- she is a woman! Looking with earnest, questioning eye into the future, she sees hope for her little children. There shall come a day when the longing of her soul for better things shall be realized by them! And patiently this.quiet woman lives on hope, and by faith sees the dawning of the day of Equity! I have shown you the soul of one quiet farmer's wife, or rather a glimpse of it, for who can photograph the whole world as it revolves in every living soul? You can only see part of it at a time. All over the land, in unsuspected places, in many a

home there dwell such waiting spirits, such earnest souls, that bide their time and work in the minds of their little ones, sowing seed for the future, which shall ripen in God's good time.Ilo PennWORTH.David PlumbWHAT measures WORTH in any soul?Is wealth or boundless power's control?Or depth and breadth of learned lore?Or inborn grace in ample store?Or manners fair, without a flaw?Or strict regard to honor's law?Or all the graces that combineTo constitute the Muses nine?Or all the virtues whose arrayDoth but a harmless life display?Not one nor all of these give birthTo genuine, true, and Godlike WORTH;All these, though some one single soulMight bear the splendor of the whole,Were far too few, too poor, alone,To vie with deeds of mercy done.Not what we get, but what we give,What we bestow, not what receive;Not what we board, but what we spreadFor others' weal, not what lies dead,Or lives but to our own behoof -Is WORTH'S true measure and its proof.A draught given to a thirsty soulOutweighs, outlives the gaudy wholeOf clustering gifts that deftly dressThe mind, but ne'er do others bless:A mite bestowed, in mercy's name,From scanty store, transcends the fameThat learning, wealth, or power may claim.Not wisdom, power and knowledge proveGod to be God -- but that He's LOVE:'Tis this that crowns the Godhead's Worth,From this the Godlike springs to birth;All else is but a splendid show,If lack we this; if 'twere not so,WORTH were but worthless, being this --A brilliant glow of selfishness.DAVID PLUMB.Editorial DepartmentThe Sixteenth AmendmentBy the ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment to the National Constitution, guaranteeing suffrage to colored men upon equal terms with whites,-- the official promulgation of which is daily expected, -- a moral warfare unparalleled, for its character and scope of purpose, in the history of Republics, closes, grasping the full results of its hardly-achieved victory. The "irrepressible conflict" going on in the Nation ever since its existence, shaking the very foundations of government and causing the costliest sacrifice of blood and treasure, ends in the legal abolishment of Caste, as applied to one-half of a race, and in the full recognition of MANHOOD SUFFRAGE, 
irrespective of Color or Nationality. It was a brave struggle, challenging the admiration of the world, but the battle has only been half fought. There is a Caste class yet in the Land, deprived of political and legal rights, to be enfranchised, -- it is the WOMEN of the Land. Manhood Suffrage has been secured, but Womanhood Suffrage -- not less important -- is yet to be achieved.That the present is a favorable moment to urge upon Congress an Amendment abolishing all political distinctions on account of sex, we think is evident to all friends of Impartial Suffrage. Hitherto,the bar in the way of such legislation, whether justly or unjustly, has been the Negro. Standing with his hand outstretched for the Ballot -- the hand that grasped the musket on so many battle-fields -- he has precluded even the consideration of any similar measure. Senators and Representatives, favorable on principle to an Amendment abolishing all political distinctions on account of sex, have resisted its introduction in Congress, desiring first a final disposition of Manhood Suffrage. That this has been the powerful obstacle to its more carefal consideration, we need no  assurances, that might be multiplied, from the lips of many of its leading Members. But now all this is altered. The distracting question of Negro Suffrage has passed, irrevocably, from politics; and there is a clear field in the Forty-first Congress for this now leading question of the age, which should be promptly occupied by the friends of Woman Suffrage. The ear of legislators, without any other interest sustaining injury, can now be gained. No decent pretext longer exists for the delay of Congress to act promptly upon an Amendment conferring suffrage upon Woman, such as covered by the admirable bill introduced by the Hon. G. W. Julian in the House last winter. Petitions since have rolled in upon both branches of the National Legislature, from the East and the West, showing the interest in such legislation. From one district in Ohio, it is said, over 1,700 signatures to a petition for the Sixteenth Amendment, were procured within a fortnight. At the recent hearing of the Committee appointed by the Washington Woman Suffrage Convention, before the Joint Committee of the House and Senate for the District of Columbia, a most favorable impression was produced upon the Members, and many assurances were given of co-operation, by both Senators and Representatives, when the subject should be brought before them.All the signs of the time are auspicious. Utah follows Wyoming in conferring suffrage upon Woman. The West and East alike are ablaze with Conventions. Outpost after outpost of opinion has been carried. The doors o falmost every State Legislature are besieged by the friends of Woman Suffrage. Public opinion is fully ripe for the grant legislation of Congress, perfecting our democratic theory of government and abolishing all political distinctions on account of sex. Let Congress act. Let Mr. Julian, of whose improved health we rejoice to learn, revive his Bill; and let an urgent demand, by the friends of Woman Suffrage, from all parts of the Land, be made for its speedy passage and incorporation into the Federal Constitution.A WAIL FROM THE TRIBUNE.THE griefs of some of our neighbors always excite our compassion more deeply than those of others, and we confess to the liveliest sympathy in whatever may be the special plaint of the N. Y. Tribune, as poured forth to its widely spread and, in the main, intelligent constitu-

ency. Especially in its efforts to grapple with the so-called "Woman Question," to shed a gleam of philosophic light on that vexed problem, it has always excited our profoundest commiseration. So clearly annointed, apparently, has been its editorial vision to see that the cry of Woman for the ballot would be fraught with every imaginable evil to humanity - and so curiously and illogically constant, in season and out of season, have been its efforts to avert the diaster from the Nation, that we have not been able, at all times, to repress the wish that better arguments were not at command to prop a cause which its venerable, kindly-hearted editor-in-chief evidently has so near at heart.One of the latest of these evidences of a settled purpose to find only cause of lamentation in the swift march of progress, is to be found in its leading article of February 12th, under the caption of "The Lost Woman." Hitherto, its regrets over ruthlessly shattered idols had been frequent and unmistakable, but scarcely in such moving language presented to the public. When, by a majestic sweep, the wave of reform touched our furthest verge of Territory, and Wyoming proudly wrote "SUFFRAGE FOR WOMAN" upon its escutcheon, challenging the admiration of the Nation, the Tribune recognized, as it were, the "handwriting on the wall," and, bowing to the inevitable, has since mourned the degeneracy of the race, as one "refusing to be comforted." How it bewails the "Lost Woman" of some mythical, bygone age, the extraction of one paragraph only must serve to show: "When the iconoclastic hands of the reformer were first laid upon the Domestic Woman, our judgment consented, but our heart ached forebodingly. We saw her dragged from the fireside and placed upon the rostrum without a word. The necessities of the age required it. But we kept like all other men, hidden out of sight, the old ideal, 'Lovely Woman,' the 'ministering angel.' The vision has so many names, but we all know it; as beautiful as it is pure; as tender as strong; as full of grace in body as in soul. With this ideal we have followed at high-pressure rate the real woman, tugging after her out of breath to the lecture-room, the convention, the clinic, desperately trying to reconcile the two. They should be one, we were resolved. The New Woman should be developed to the extreme limit of her wish, and yet we and the world would not lose the sweet, gracious Presence of home."Are we insulting the comprehension of our readers to offer aught of comment on the above? Is it necessary to ask if the representative women of the day - those who lend to literature, art, the hall of science,

or the platform lustre - are a whit less worthy of the respect of the public than those of any previous period? Is womanly grace, culture, sweetness and domesticity fled when the van of the great army of progress is led by such rare spirits as LUCRETIA MOTT, L. MARIA CHILD, LUCY STONE, JULIA WARD HOWE, and a host of others, whose names are typical of all that is noblest in reform, as well as of what is most unblameable in private life? Indeed, was there ever on historic page so illustrious a roll of pre-eminently gifted women as this Nineteenth Century is giving the world? for, as never before, Woman is becoming conscious of full sense of her responsibilities, and the knowledge is enlarging and rounding to a symmetrical completeness, hitherto undreamed of, of her entire nature. Instead of the sun setting upon the virtue and the glory of the sex, it is the growing effulgence of the Orient, betokening the New Era and the larger usefulness of Woman. The Woman of the Past, a creature of circumstances, of fettered faculties, the legal slave and submissive vassal to the whim of Man, is indeed "Lost;" but in its stead rises the new Ideal, a Woman, made as Man, in God's image, With equal faculties, equal rights and responsibilities, and equally accountable for the rightful exercise of all those faculties to her Creator.Truly, far behind other liberal journals of the day the Tribune has lagged on the "Woman Question." It has borne an honored name, and led the "forlorn hope" of many a worthy cause in the past. Is its character for liberality and fair-mindedness, earned by its persistent devotion to principle through so many years, to be tarnished by its tenacious opposition to one of the noblest and most sorely needed reforms of the age? With or without the Tribune, the cause will go on, but for its own sake those who have stood by it in the past, and who wish it well now, would be glad to see a reformation in its treatment of a question which, at least, has well earned the right to its respect.AMERICAN GIRLS.NOT one of the least hopeful signs or the future, for our country, is the growing thoughtfulness and measure of intelligence among women, especially those just entering upon the theater of active life. True, fashion has yet its devotees, and society in its maelstrom absorbs too much of the bloom and fairness of womanhood. Fifth Avenues glitter, 

and opera-houses flash back diamonds as of old; but the observing mind cannot but realize that a marked change is taking place even in the strongholds of wealth and fashion, and that society is becoming revolutionized in thought as never before.One cause of this emancipation of woman from the bonds of public opinion, and the assertion of individuality and the right to judge of what constitutes proper sphere and action, lies in the essential difference between a monarchical and a republican form of government. Whoever has traveled abroad cannot but have contrasted the dwarfed sphere and benighted minds of the women of Continental Europe with the general intelligence and the larger freedom accorded to the sex in our more favored country. The late war, and the important part played therein by woman, has stimulated this spirit of inquiry and investigation; and, as never before, American women are considering their duties to society and their individual responsibilities, as rational, soul-gifted creatures, to the laws of their being, and to their Creator. The conventions all over the land, the speeches and resolutions, the petitions thickly strewn as the leaves of autumn, but imperfectly denote this general awakening of interest. Such manifestations are only as the froth thrown up to the surface; below is the deep under-current of thought, only at times apparent to the superficial eye.Of this spirit of inquiry on the part of the better type of women, those for whom life means something more than mere passive or animal existence, those who fill editorial chairs, beyond many, have excellent means of knowing. Perhaps there is scarcely a conductor of a reputable journal whose testimony might not be relied upon for evidences of this drifting of thought into new and, hitherto deemed, improper channels. Letters accumulating in drawers and pigeon holes, communications breathing earnest, long-smothered thought, -- the awakened hope, or despairing wail, of the writer, -- is the experience of every editor. Not always is the conviction clear. Among the thousands of young women of America who to-day are studying this problem, of the capacities, the alms, the rightful sphere of their sex, there are all shades of thought and creed. Many are groping in the vale, doubting whether they may safely follow their new guides, conscious only of the blind sense, the want of something better, more satisfying; others are on the shining

mountain top, with the clear conviction of the needs of their sex, and animated by the heroic desire to do battle in their behalf until Justice is wrung from the Nation. Of the latter class, the young, enthusiastic Messengers of the Word, and pages of THE ADVOCATE, since its establishment, have had their fair proportion of bold, outspoken utterances; but the sadder burden of the former, those who yet grope in mental darkness, -- seeing the barrenness but not the higher meanings of life, -- what pen or tongue may portray!But, happily for humanity, the class whose convictions are clear upon the underlying principles of reform, is rapidly augmenting and destined soon to be the controlling influence. Already, of representative women, whether in science, literature or art, the number is but few who are not identified, actively or by expressions of sympathy, with the so-termed "Woman Movement." In literature especially, one can scarcely recall a name known and honored by the world, the possessor of which has not stood upon Woman Suffrage platforms or given adherence to their doctrines. No blush of shame now, as twenty years ago, need crimson the cheek of a maiden whose convictions of duty lead her to make a public acknowledgment, by word and deed, of her faith; for, instead of a despised few, the army of reform which she joins numbers under its banner the wise, the good, the highly cultured of the land. Fortified thus by the counsels of those grown gray in the service of humanity, paying to them the debt of gratitude by loyalty to the cause they have tenderly cherished, witnessing the barriers of Prejudice and Law crumble, and the realm of Fashion itself totter to its fall, the true "Girl of the Period" is blessed beyond any of her race and kind in living in a period that is to witness such important events and in having it in her power so largely to contribute to the good of humanity.THE NEWARK CONVENTION.A VERY interesting Woman Suffrage Convention, for the purpose of organizing an Essex County Woman Suffrage Association, was held in Newark, N. J., on the 16th ult. Among the well known friends of the Cause present, by the most of whom addresses were delivered, were LUCY STONE, Mrs. MARY F. DAVIS, Mrs. CHARLOTTE WILBOUR, HENRY B. 

BLACKWELL, and, Mrs. CELIA BURLEIGH. Mr. JOHN WHITEHEAD , a well-known citizen of Morristown, presided with ability.In his address, upon taking the chair, Mr. WHITEHEAD expressed himself as deeply interested in the movement, stating that women had no equality whatever, legally, politically, or financially, with men, and abjured the girls present, who were "looking into the show-cases of existence," to take hold of the movement and to interest themselves in the great questions of life.LUCY STONE gave an exceedingly interesting sketch of her recent experiences in Western Conventions. She observed, smilingly, that "the sun rose this morning just as well as if the women of Utah hadn't voted." She spoke of seeing two girls managing a steam engine, which monster didn't know whether its master was a girl or not. She said that in Ohio, recently, 1,700 names had been signed to a XVIth Amendment petition within a fortnight.Mrs. CELIA BURLEIGH followed, speaking upon "Woman's Right to be a Woman." "To be a woman," she thought, "is to be all that the unfettered feminine nature can accomplish under favoring conditions, with the largest culture, and without compulsion or hindering repulsion."The addresses throughout were of an exceedingly interesting character, and the close attention paid by the large audience to the proceedings, manifested the interest awakened in the Cause in a hitherto indifferent community.By a special resolution the Association was declared to be, "for purposes of protection, affiliation and efficiency," auxiliary to the State and American Associations. Resolutions commending to the consideration of Congress Mr. Julian's proposition for a XVIth Amendment, demanding suffrage for woman, because, she, being refined, intelligent and moral, would change the manner and ways of the public, and asking for equal wages, were also adopted.Very fortunate was the Association in securing, with a long list of assistant officers, for its President, Mrs. MARY F. DAVIS Of Orange, whose name is a guarantee of future efficiency, and a more than local sphere of usefulness for the Organization.THE COUNTER CURRENT - WOMEN IN THE NEGATIVEAs journalists striving to deserve the reputation of fair-minded we have never ignored the fact that, in our land, there was a large proportion of women whose judgment, or prejudice, arrayed them in opposition to the demand of the hour, -- from the so-called "strong-minded" of the sex, -- the BALLOT. So far from this being the case we have sought - as our pages will bear witness -- to be strictly just to all shades of opinion; and, from time to time, views as adverse to that objective point -- Woman Suffrage, have been presented in THE ADVOCATE, as the general tenor of articles in its favor. Of course, our own conviction, -- as that, we believe, of the greater portion of intelligent women who have given the question a calm, dispassionate consideration, -- is clear. There were slaves contented in their chains; and it is not strange that there are women satisfied with their present condition. Not always those most degraded, physically or morally, are most conscious of their degradation. But if there be a fetter, whether upon the limb or upon the exercise of thought and action, it is not the less oppression, even if the spirit chafe not under the restraint. But as in slavery of the body there were spirits pining for freedom and daring all to accomplish it; so in this mental and legal slavery of women there are natures chaffing as no man may know under the century-imposed restrictions of Custom and Law, willing to be martyrs to opinion - to go as one crucified - so they might lift the cruel burden resting so long upon their sex. Rare Spirits! The world may deride them as noisy agitators, but their words and shining example fall as the good seed, to return, in awakened thought and souls girded to action, a hundred-fold.One of the latest of these objections to Woman Suffrage, coming from that saddest of quarters, woman herself, is put forth by a Mrs. Slocum, who, in the absence of her husband, is temporarily invested with the charge of the St. Charles (Mo.) Herald. As Mrs. Slocum's card has been tenderly received by the conservative press of the country, finding its way even, with much similar matter, into the columns of the N.Y. Tribune, we will quote the lady's exact words, forbearing aught of 

comment upon what will be appreciated at its true weight by all our readers:If these "woman's rights" women who are continually harping upon this subject, and making themselves ridiculous in the eyes of sensible people would stay at home, and attend to their household duties, nurse their babies, and train up their children in the way which God directs, and exercise a healthy, moral, and refining influence upon the community, they would do their country greater service than all the ballots they could cast in a life-time.THE CONTRASTFROM time to time we have had occasion to note the difference of treatment which the question of Woman Suffrage has received from the press of this city. The Tribune, with liberal antecedents, and a constituency the natural supporters of the cause, as we have repeatedly stated, has been the relentless, ofttimes petty, opponent of even the nobler phases of the movement; while certain other journals have lent a support, or shown an appreciation of the scope and power of the reform, as unexpected as gratifying. Especially the News, a widely-circulated, and hitherto conservative-toned journal, has pursued a course upon this question which has done much to elevate it in the esteem of the liberal portion of the public. We have noted its recent editorials very closely, and we see no reason to doubt the sincerity of its professions. Truly, it is a revolution in journalism when the Herald or the News must read a lesson in morals and in courtesy to the pretentious mouth-pieces of opinion of the metropolis! In contradistinction to the shuffling, illogical course of the Tribune, mark the manly, more truly democratic sentiments of the News, as embodied in the following paragraph from its weekly issue of the 20th ult.:"In spite of ridicule the Woman Suffrage Movement is making substantial progress in the West. It has been decreed by the Democratic Legislature of Wyoming and the Mormon Legislature of Utah, and now a bill has
passed the highest branch of the Republican Senate of Minnesota, giving the whole question to the decision of the people at the ballot-box. Several projects are before the Missouri and Kansas Legislatures, with fair prospects of success. The time has gone by when this matter can be treated with a jest. It has resolved itself into a serious fact, and when women are actually voting in the West, the posaible consequences of the innovation to our institutions become a legitimate subject for newspaper discussion. The time will probably arrive before long when we will have to meet this question in the East. Then it will be pertinent to in-

quire why it is that the march of the Woman Suffrage Movement has met with so little real opposition. The anti-slavery movement fought against organized odds for years, but this new crusade, which will exert a still more potent influence in revolutionizing parties and politics is literally 'walking over the course.'"WE invite especial attention to the excellent article entitled "Suffrage for Women" by Mrs. FRANCES D. GAGE, in our present issue. Always earnest, eminently practical in her views, clear and concise in statement, Mrs. GAGE has long excelled as a vigorous, effective writer; and this latest offering from her pen will be no less warmly welcomed by a wide circle of readers than the many productions which have stamped "Aunt Fanny" as one of the most pleasing writers of the age.WE commence in the present issue of THE ADVOCATE a series of papers entitled "The Legal Status of Woman," from the pen of a well-known advocate and writer upon jurisprudence and questions of reform. The admirable presentation, thus far, of the question affords ample guaranty of the continued interesting character of these papers and their value to the general public.LITERARY.THE BIBLE AND WOMAN SUFFRAGE. By John Hooker. Pamphlet. 18 pp. Published by the Connecticut Woman Suffrage Association. No. 1.The great activity in the Woman Suffrage movement is well illustrated, not only in the increasing number of journals specially devoted to the question, but in the tracts and publications put forth by the various State Associations. In our last, we noticed the excellent little work by Mrs. M. E. Joslyn Gage, entitled "Woman as Inventor," published by the New York State Woman Suffrage Association; and before us lies an equally valuable publication, the initial tract issued by the Woman Suffrage Association of Connecticut, now one of the best organized and most efficient of the New England State Associations.Realizing that, of the arguments most relied upon by the opponents of Woman Suffrage, the Bible precepts are, perhaps, held up as the most convincing and unanswerable, Mr. Hooker has assayed to remove this stumbling-block from the Christian mind, and for the satisfactory manner in which he has performed his task he merits the gratitude of all true believers in Christianity and well-

wishers of humanity. At the commencement of this thoughtful, tersely written essay, Mr. Hooker says:I believe that it admits of demonstration, that the passages Scripture relied upon by the opponents of Woman Suffrage, conceding all that they claim as to their meaning, and as to the permanency and universality of their application, have nothing to do with the question, and must be ruled out of the discussion for irrelevancy. I make the attempt to show this not merely in the interest of Woman Suffrage, but of the Bible as well. The enemy of all good could not do a greater service to the cause of evil than by leading Christian men blindly to interpose the Bible as a barrier against every great social reform, so that when the reform triumphs, it shall seem to the unreflecting mass of men to be, not merely the defeat of the opposers of the reform, but the overthrow of the Bible also. This book is too precious, and a recognition of its authority to important to the world, for its friends and the friends of truth to expose it so unnecessarily to discredit. The Bible can be put to a better use, it cannot be put to a worse, than to be thrown into the street to help form a barricade against every attempt to overthrow old dynasties of wrong."Further on, in carefully considering and disposing of the various objections based upon certain Scriptural passage familiar to our readers, Mr. Hooker thus speaks of the Apostle, in connection with his oft quoted utterances in condemnation of woman:"Still, it is not so certain that Paul would have been shocked at this claim of equality for women. How does Dr. Bushnell know that he would? He had heard of the Queen of Sheba, and there is no reason to think he was shocked at every mention of her name. And the magnificent Cleopatra had then just finished her reign, and he had heard of other women on thrones. He was very free to speak his mind, and wrote many epistles. If the tenure of political power by these women shocked him, it is a little strange that he has not somewhere put his emotions on record."At the conclusion of his admirable essay, covering the entire ground of Biblical objections to Woman Suffrage, and well worthy, by its weight of reasoning, of general circulation, Mr. Hooker says:"So far from Scriptural authority being against the enfranchisement of women, the whole tenor of Christ's teachings, which we must all accept as the highest authority, and which to the writer are the teachings of a Divine Master, present a great law of liberty and personal responsibility, which can find its full application only in the perfect equality of man and woman, in the home and in the State. When it receives this application society will have taken the great-

est step ever taken since Christ came, toward a perfect Christian civilization, and the reign of Christ, which his followers have worked for and waited for so long, will be nearer at hand. It is the perfect conviction that this movement is one of true progress towards that promised and blessed reign, that gives the writer his deepest interest in it, and makes him certain of its success."PATTY GRAY'S JOURNEY TO THE COTTON ISLANDS, by Mrs. Caroline H, Dall, Lee & Shepard, publishers, Boston, the initial volume of which it was our pleasure to notice, some months since, has now reached the third of the series, conducting Patty to Mount Vernon, from whence, in subsequent volumes, she will proceed on her novel journey to the Islands of the South. This fascinating and highly instructive series of histories for the young, preserves all the freshness and charm of narrative which rendered the initial volume so justly popular; and the thousands of boys and girls who, with rare delight, followed the "Little Traveller" from her New England home to Baltimore, will welcome as eagerly these pleasing continuations of the incident-strewn journey, with even a whetted appetite for what is to follow in the stranger fields of exploration. For imparting knowledge, in its most pleasing form, to the young, Mrs. Dall possesses a rare gift; and those who know her only as a foremost writer upon graver subjects can have little conception of the ease with which her versatile pen turns from the consideration of the vexed problems of the age to stamp her as one of the most charming of story writers. The three parts are neatly issued in a pretty little case, and though especially designed for the holiday season, will prove as acceptable a gift to an intelligent, book-loving child, now as at that happier season. Parents desiring to spread before their children, books inculcating the truest morality and humanity, should not omit to procure for them all the volumes comprising this charming series, reflecting so creditably alike upon the genius of the author and the good taste of the Publishers.THE OPIUM HABIT, With Suggestions as to the Remedy. 335 pp. New York: Harper & Brothers.This volume, although compiled chiefly for the benefit of opium-eaters, containing full directions how to effect a cure, will be found of absorbing interest, as well, to the general reader; who, in the interesting cases cited, traces the victim of this insidious indulgence through the various stages of slavish addiction to the vile habit, ending, with rare exceptions, only with the extinction of life itself.Partially acquainted as may be the reader with the deplorable consequences arising from the use of opium in our midst, which, we regret to say by statistics

appears to be frightfully on the increase; he yet arises from a perusal of the work feeling that, in the harrowing details of the suffering and misery produced, a revelation had been made to him such as before he had never fully realized. Among the cases which are narrated at length are those of De Quincy, Coleridge, Robert Hall, Wilberforce, and Fitz Hugh Ludlow. With the sad experience of the latter, well-known as one of the most brilliant of our young American writers, the most of our readers are familiar with the thrilling article which he contributed, under the heading "How Shall they be Saved," a year or more ago, to Harper's Magazine.The work is clear in style, copious and pain-staking in statement, and is, in all respects, a valuable contribution to our literature. We trust that its timely appeararance and circulation may do much to excite thought and arrest the ravages of one of the most frightful evils of the time.The Standard Phonographic Visitor, edited by Andrew J. Graham, 563 Broadway, comes regularly to our table, always an appreciated Visitor. Mr. Graham, a man of indomitable energy and liberal convictions, is justly regarded as at the head of his profession in this country; and the Visitor, which has now reached its fourth volume, is well worthy of the patronage of all desiring to acquaint themselves with the highly useful art of Phonography. In addition to its special studies for students, the Visitor weekly presents a choice department of Miscellany.CLUB RATES. -- IMP0RTANT REDUCTI0N.THE ADVOCATE hereafter will be furnished at $1.50 per year, single copy, and sent to addresses as desired, in Clubs of four or more, upon the following terms:Four subscriptions, . . . . $5.00 Ten       do 	  . . . . 10.00 Twenty    "	        . . . . 16.00We will hereafter send The Nat. Anti-Slavery Standard ($3.00 a year) and THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE, each one year to old or new subscribers, the two for $3.50; --The Woman's Journal ($3.00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $3.50;The Radical ($4.00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $5.00;The Herald of Health ($2. 00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $3.00.Advertising DepartmentBLACKWELL AND CO.
92 WARREN STREET, TRENTON, N.J.Dealers in and Agents forTHE LATEST AND MOST IMPROVED MACHINERY
For the Farm and Garden.
MANUFACTURERS AND INVENTORSare solicited to send us their circulars and terms, as, being centrally located in one of the most productive farming districts, and having amongst our customers the most enterprising farmers, we are prepared to give first-class implements a favorable introduction.Address   BLACKWELL & CO.,
Agricultural and Seed Warehouse,
92 Warren street, Trention, N.J.N.B. - Please state where you saw this advertisementAYER'S HAIR VIGOR,For restoring Gray Hair to its natural Vitality and Color.A dressing which is at once agreeable, healthy, and effectual for preserving the hair. Faded or gray hair is soon restored to its original color with the gloss and freshness of youth. Thin hair in thickened, falling hair checked, and baldness often, though not always, cured by its use. Nothing can restore the hair where the follicles are destroyed, or the glands atrophied and decayed. But such as remain can be saved for usefulness by this application. Instead of fouling the hair with a pasty sediment, it will keep it clean and vigorous. Its occasional use will prevent the hair from turning gray or falling off, and consequently prevent baldness. Free from those deleterious substances which make some preparations dangerous and injurious to the hair, the Vigor can only benefit but not harm it. If wanted merely for aHAIR DRESSING,
nothing else can be found so desirable. Containing neither oil nor dye, it does not soil white cambric, and yet lasts long on the hair, giving it a rich glossy lustre and a grateful perfume.PREPARED BY DR. J. C. AYER & CO.,Practical and Analytical Chemists,
LOWELL, MASS.PRICE $1.00.TO. THE SICK. -- A CURE.
Established Twenty-four Consecutive Years.Acute and Chronic Diseases treated without Medicines, and permanently cured.Phebe A. Ferguson Dusenbery, Caler C. Dusenbury, Magnetic-Movement and Water-cure Physicians. No. 29 West Ninth street, between Fifth and Sixth avenues, New York City.THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATENO. IV. April, 1870. VOL. III.THE MARKET WOMAN.Antoinette Brown Blackwell(Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1869, by ANTOINETTE BROWN BLACKWELL, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of New York.]CHAPTER X. AFTER THIRTY YEARS."I AM looking for some of those little round tomatoes for preserving; but I don't see any in the market," said a lady, carrying a small fancy basket on her arm, to a friend walking at her side, as they threaded their way from stand to stand along the crowded market place. "I shall have to order some. I wish I could find Mrs. Reband! She is not here this morning."Why, there she is!" replied the other. "Don't you see! She is speaking to some one out yonder. I caught sight of her this moment.""I don't see her!" looking intently, and taking up the line of progress in the direction indicated. "Where is she?""Yonder! just outside of the crowd, talking to the gentleman with the white hat.""That? The tall lady, in the light shawl and straw hat with the blue trimming! Is that she? I was looking for her pink sunbonnet."Both ladies smiled as they made their way up to the veritable market woman in her unusual dress."What a difference it makes to get a new coat! It is like changing a field
rabbit into a parlor pussy cat," laughed the younger lady as they came near. "She is a nice market woman; but I don't think I can shake hands with her in

that dress. I am not very democratic, you know, and I'll fall back till your business is settled.""Oh, I like her!" answered the other. "I don't see why she may not be the peer of a queen!" She went forward with alacrity, offering her hand, which was met by another as trimly gloved and as firm and open in its grasp as her own."Good morning, Mrs. Reband. I have been looking for you.""Good morning, Mrs. Smith. This is a very fine day.""Yes, very fine. The shower last night washed yesterday's dust out of the air, and the sky this morning is as clear as crystal. I had almost given up finding you, Mrs. Reband. Have you any of those small, round tomatoes to-day, such as I saw on your stand last week.""No, not to-day," replied the market woman; smiling a little as if a slight sense of humor had struggled into the changing expression of her face. "When I have anything to sell I come here in my market dress. To-day I have come as a purchaser, and am in search of something that I am commissioned to get for a neighbor.""Ah, yes!" said Mrs. Smith, her own eye twinkling also. "Then will it be out of order for me to speak to you at all about business to-day?""Oh, no! Certainly not; I am like John Gilpin even on holiday:"'So down he came; for loss of time,
Although it grieved him sore,
Yet loss of pence, full well he knew
Would trouble him much more."And Mrs. Reband dropped into her usual attentive, untalkative business manner - in readiness for the expected order, which was given without delay."I'll have the tomatoes here in good condition to-morrow morning, Mrs. Smith. I shall be here at the stand to-morrow all day." The market woman bowed and passed on; and Mrs. Smith was rejoined by her waiting companion, who had remained within hearing of the conversation."I declare, Mary," she began, with great glee, "this is better than a play! The simile of wild rabbit and parlor pussy cat won't answer; it is more like changing a yellow bird into a real singing canary, isn't it? She must be the first market woman who is able to drive her bargains with a silver hammer of poor, dear Cowper's! I think I am beginning to get republicanized after all, and you can count on me as a rather hopeful pupil."It is now more than thirty years since our first introduction to the market woman, on that morning when Nature herself had condescended to honor her as a bride, with a regal pageant of matchless winter splendor. Whether her hair

now is grey or is only fair and light it would be impossible for me to say. I only know that it harmonizes with the genuine, creamy, Quaker-colored, middle-aged complexion, which at once impresses you, whether her face looks out from under the pink sunbonnet or the white straw -- a complexion that I always associate with the high seat on the woman's side of the Friend's meeting house rather than with either the endless confusion of the market place, or with the sunshine of a market garden, tinting everything it touches with hues deeply dyed. yet the fact remains; our market woman is now past fifty, and for thirty years she has been at her post all the morning, deducting the exceptions like that of to-day; and her afternoons are familiar with sunshine and practical toil; yet her complexion is like that of an unworldly, peaceful Quaker saint. Voice and carriage, too, are in harmony; but just as the look, tone, and manner of worldly shrewdness will sometimes peep out at you from under the broad brim of a successful Quaker merchant, -- not out of keeping with his whole peaceful bearing, but as it were the very spice and flavor of it, -- so there is a raciness of practical wisdom in all the ways and doings of our successful market woman.Saturdays she is all day in the bustling market, often till near midnight, but then she balances that account by sitting through two sessions nearly every Sunday in the dim religious light of exceeding orthodoxy and its surroundings; and if she seen after church again in the garden sunshine, now walking meditatively, and now stooping to examine plant or seed, yet this only brings up the average in her days of mingled light and shade. If their lamps at the Reband
homestead are early out on a Sunday evening, while Monday mornings the family are astir betimes, yet the people expect as much punctuality in market hours as in their Monday morning papers. Whatever the emergency; -- and the second day of the week is in part sacred also to the wash-tub, in this household as in others; -- nobody here works on Sunday. Have they not clearly the right then to balance accounts by both the late and the early sleep on "first days?"Many changes have come and gone in the family since our first acquaintance. The aged mother-in-law ripe in years and in grandmotherly kindness, has slept her last sleep in the midst of her children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, who supported her failing footsteps tenderly to the last. The young husband is fast becoming one of the elders, known and honored in the land; one son, the father of a small but rather numerous family, is living in the repaired old farm house on the "East lots;" and it no longer has even the rim of a mortgage hanging from its chimney-tops. It was withdrawn about the time that its shadow had exterminated the last Canada thistle. This son, true to the practical creed which his mother has taught him, and loyally proud to follow in the

honored footsteps of this ancestors, may be seen often in the morning driving his own milk cart into town; selling, even in these degenerate days, milk warranted to be milk, and not extended. The young people were all educated at a famous Western University, where men and woman alike may receive the advantages to be derived from any course of study which they choose to pursue; but the two older children married early, and the daughter, now a widow, is once more an inmate of her early home, -- her little boy playing odd and even with his baby sister on the same kitchen stair, under the chamber door, where we left his mother playing nearly twenty years ago. The youngest son, studious and ambitious, has recently graduated from College, and is now studying law, with every prospect of a marked and eminent future before him - at least as seen from the standpoint of his mother's most earnest hopes.Yet the market woman herself is not greatly changed. Something more of self-confidence, the general consciousness of a widened experience it may be, has come with the deepened furrows which however are not yet prominent. Her form is ampler and seems even a littler taller than in the early days.Life is never stagnant in the market place. One who has ears to hear, may hear many things anywhere to general profit. In the market, men and women of all classes are coming and going continually, and a quick, shrewd person can easily manage to pick up and fit into some general system of experience a good deal of miscellaneous knowledge of men, manners, and current events. Certain it is that the market has shown itself to be on the whole an improving school to Mrs. Susan Reband, whose early educational advantages had necessarily been somewhat limited. She is a thoroughly sensible, self-respecting American woman; with many peers, but "no superiors and no inferiors among her countrywomen."If we look at her now in the Saturday afternoon lull of that "next day," as she sits on a box by her stall, waiting for the evening customers, we shall find that she has also, in addition to the babble of market lore and experience, other sources of improvement to draw from. Half-a-dozen Now York and city daily papers, some of them of many days back, are lying in her lap. She reads one and another with an evident purpose, as if pursuing some topic systematically, looking up and talking now and then to a neighbor or a customer; but giving in speech no clue to the topic of her thoughts.Peeping over her shoulder, as discreet people may in the ideal world, superior to conventionalities, with no breach of etiquette; we shall find that many of the papers lately have been saying a good deal about Oregon. Now that California is disposed of, 0regon is predetermined by Government and private

enterprise to follow next in the order of Pacific settlement; and it is wisely decided to lose no unnecessary time in effecting this result. Sanguine men have ingeniously advertised in glowing colors; spicy letters and brilliant leading articles appearing simultaneously in various periodicals, seizing at once upon the public attention.In a word, Mrs. Reband, like many others on this adventurous continent, is carefully reading up Oregon; or rather, on this particular afternoon she is rapidly reviewing a reading already accomplished. The Rebands and some of their neighbors are thinking of the far West as a future home. Their land is now too valuable to be used much longer for merely market purposes, and therefore they are seriously contemplating change of base. "A rolling stone gathers no moss;" but in the period of the glaciers even the staunchest granite boulders traveled many hundreds of miles to general profit; and even a farmer, who seems to be as firmly rooted in the old homestead as his own old favorite trees, may willingly tear himself up root and branch if circumstances become sufficiently imperative.Just as the daylight faded out and the lamps were beginnning to be lighted in the market place, the market woman folded away her papers with an emphatic gesture. Not a word escaped her lips; but a certain decided manner would have indicated to on who had been closely observing her, that she had at length reached some fixed purpose."Well, I will go out and see for myself! So much I am determined upon," was the thought with which she tied up and put away her paper bundle.Then she pushed aside the whole subject, sending it into some back corner of her mind, and brought all her powers to bear upon the turbulent stream of incoming, possible customers. She was a genuine, native-born huckster again from head to foot; dignified but wary, and watchful for the least incident which might possibly be coined into profitable traffic -- the whole visible woman breathing an atmosphere of the present moment, with her entire being moulded to the orthodox market pattern as completely as a mollusk is fashioned to his familiar shell; or as a hermit crab, whether he has thrust his body into a snail shell or into a pyrula, patterns himself upon the model of the new house which he has adopted. Her perennial, unfading pink sunbonnet seemed to "light up" with the gas as if it too meant business and was a veritable copartner as it was a covering and insignia of its mistress. The apples on her stall flushed rosily under the eyes of a pretty girl who came to buy them; the yellow pumpkins outshone the blinking lamps in a steady glow of honest pride; and even

the cabbages mimicked half closed, great flowerbuds - an unspoken delusive promise of better things to come, lingering around them like an aroma.There is no more fancy in the wonderful fact that a powerful will can impress itself upon everything about it, animate and inanimate. Nature is closely akin in all her ultimate essences/CHAPTER XI.
THE MARKET BY GASLIGHT.A SATURDAY night market in a great country-city, with its one brilliant center of trafficking interest is a sight worth beholding once at least; but hardly worth elbowing your way into more than once if you have marketing leisure at other hours, and are not a chronic lover of the street excitements of a crowd by gaslight.The Market, like the broad street in front of it far and near, is brilliantly lighted and now in the early Autumn, long rows of well piled country wagons are filed along the outer edge, like a heavy fringe upon the principal garment. Smartly dressed people throng by on the sidewalk in a continuous flow, a divided stream with the two currents setting in opposite directions, -- each farmer's wagon the vicinage of a little outlying pool into which the stragglers eddy one by one, circling about there for a moment or two, and then drifting back again into the current. All the stores along the street are ablaze and gaily thronged with both lookers-on and purchasers. Young people, lovers possibly, and even family parties with children, are walking in the pretty little park opposite; while those who seek for still greater seclusion are strolling along under the great elms which interlace their branches over the whole street on the lower side of the green.Within the Market, the butchers, the cheese dealers, and the fish-mongers are in the full tide of business. Their commodities, -- to people who find always more prose than poetry in that department of sensation pertaining to our much abused nasal organs, -- are also palpably in the full tide of subtle chemical exhalations; which, like all other molecular forces, are undoubtedly very powerful, though invisible.In the vegetable department, outside the brick walls but still under the broad roof, in the midst of a Coleridge-famed aggregation of odors, there is some dim fragrance of the country yet remaining; attaching itself like an atmosphere to the coarsest produce, and asserting its ascendency even here. Our

market woman and her confreres are stationed in this neighborhood; middle men negotiating between country and city.The surging throng is dense enough to represent to an outsider the first Atlantic cable celebration in miniature, as seen from a comfortable perch inside a Broadway store. Once in the heart of the crowd, there is a little more method in its madness. It is the difference between the enthusiasm of boundless, but yet unrealized hope, and the sober, practical aims already utilized on the chart of experience. There are comparatively open outside niches to stop and catch breath in, and it is possible to make your way with a little engineering in almost any direction; but it may be best to wind your course outward through the market court, with its produce wagons and accompaniments, suggestive of an Arab encampment, and so home again through the adjoining side street.But we are to linger awhile yet with the market woman and her interests. This morning she drove into town herself - a large boy sitting at her side in the front of the vehicle. We had a peep once at her first market establishment, still youthful in all of its one-horse proportions; but this one, grown up a good while since, is commodious enough to require a span of well-grown bays to pilot it and its daily overflowing contents.After unpacking this morning, the large boy drove home again, and this evening the male Rebands, senior and junior, have both come with the vegetables which will be served up on many a better class citizen's table at to-morrow's Sunday dinner. Father and son each lend a willing hand in everything, doing all the heavy unpacking; but the traffic chiefly falls to the market woman herself. It is as naturally her vocation as checking trunks, a current supervision of baggage and of the interests of the party generally, fall legitimately into the business department of Susan Anthony, when she is engineering a company of gentlemen and ladies on some lecturing campaign.But something more than marketing is evidently in the minds of the over-coated and stove-pipe hatted representatives of the Reband family this evening. It is shared also by several others -- all of them either in stove-pipes or masculine felts, who at every lull of business gather in little knots here and there, talking in low but earnest tones. As opportunity offers they seem to be circulating about Mrs. Reband; who holds steadily to her central post and absorbed business attitude; taking her also into consultation, and listening with intent, rude deference to her quiet low-toned suggestions.At last the din and bustle are all over. The Arab encampment has not stolen silently away, but it has vanished with clatter and noise enough for any sober town on the eve of Sunday, yet without riot or tumult. The Reband

party, having extemporized a back seat in their market wagon and invited some of the consulting gentlemen to ride with them, are sitting three abreast in the wide vehicle, wending their way homewards; but still in animated and now uninterrupted conversation.The husband, wife, and a friend occupy the back seat, while two other neighbors sit facing them, one on either side of the son, who is driver, and whose feet are horseward; but his face also is turned towards his mother's, while the staid horses are left to follow their own guidance. Mrs. Reband has spoken less than any other of the party, who in their eagerness of suggestion have found it almost as hard as a company of children do to speak one at a time. Now she has cut short the tide of pros and cons by a practical, downright proposal."What do you all say to trusting me to go out to Oregon and spend the Winter prospecting?""Ha! Good! That's to the point!""You! Just the thing!""Will you do it?"The three neighbors spoke in a breath, doubtful and delighted."Why, mother!" said the son, with something both of regret and surprise. The husband said nothing."If everything is exactly as they represent, I can either take up land for us all before returning here, after sending back a description and getting your consent, or if there is any doubt about the wisdom of that, some one else can join me before we decide to buy. If there is any misrepresentation in their statements, of if settling Oregon seems undesirable on a nearer view of the country, still none of us will have sold our lands,, which are all the time rising in value under our hands; and we shall not be heavily out of pocket. The expenses will not be large when shared by us all.""But can you go, Mrs. Reband? Are you willing to go?""I can go because the Winter is not a busy time, and Mr. Reband, with Mary for housekeeper, can manage everything, None of you like to be away from your families for so long a time; but I should rather expect to be benefitted by the change, and to gain some advantages at any rate by the experience. You know yourselves whether you care to trust me in so important a matter.""Just the thing!" pronounced one emphatically. "I agree to bear my part of the expense on the spot."You are altogether the very best person amongst us all, Mrs. Reband, and if you are willing to do it, I am willing to have you, for one. Somebody must go first. We can't all pull up stakes on uncertainties, and perhaps run all our heads together into a trap.""That so! it'll cost quite some money; but we couldn't spend it in a better way if we think of going on at all; for I don't half trust to what the papers say. If you say go, I say go; and so we shall!"Father and son both proudly and affectionately assented also; and the plan was definitely agreed on before the party separated.The wedded pair drove silently on their way together after all the others had left them. When their son had been set down at his own house, where his wife and children awaited him, not a word was spoken till they halted at their own door. Then the husband bent forward, and, reaching under the deep pink sunbonnet of his thirty years' wife, he kissed her; knocking off his hat in the act, exactly as he had done at least a dozen times before since their wedding-day. He
laughed as he picked it up, in memory of this fact, when it was too late to remedy it."That was a master stroke of yours, Susy, as usual. But you will never know how much I shall miss you!""I can guess, Johnniekin. I shall miss you, also, and go all Winter groping about in that wilderness with no one to speak to. But John, I am proud tonight that you trust me so!"THE NEW YEAR'S GIFT OF JUSTICE.M.E. WrightIT is done! What is done? An act that removes from Michigan's statutes a clause that has long been a stain upon her honor; that rolls from the door of her University that stone of injustice which, sealed by official approval, has been as a wall of separation between those whom God commands to work together.The opening of Michigan University to women, is an act significant of the broad advance that progressive opinions have made within the last five years. Then, the question was agitated, and more fears than hopes were entertained of its success, judging by the tone of the various State papers at that time. Three years ago, when Theodore Tilton passed, on his lecturing tour through Ann Arbor, stopping there to feed the people with his eloquence, he did not satisfy himself by merely presenting his political theme; but tried, by earnest conversation with Professors of the University, and sensible hints regarding the duties of Legislators, to impress upon the Michigan conscience a conviction of the

gross injustice of a system which excluded from a State school one-half of the State's children. We recall the sneers of some of the Professors, the indifference of most. We remember the quibbling of the grave legislators; and even the open scorn which the suggestion met with, from not a few members of the House. We re-read a "paper" issued by the students of the University, publishing their profound opinion, that the title of G. H. W. (which letters, being interpreted, mean good house-wife) was the one for which their sisters should aspire; and assuring us that such title could not be conferred there.In view of this Past are we not justified in rejoicing in the Present, which changes the Free School system of Michigan from a sounding boast to a legal fact, -- in looking with hope toward a near Future that shall advance it to a living reality?To this grand decision of Justice we hear of but one, prominent dissenting voice; it is said that Professor Frieze, acting President, wished an exception made of the Medical Department; but no exception was made. A free entrance is given into this abode of Minerva, without reservation of even the penetralia of the temple, from the tread of woman's foot.No one doubts the justice of this act, yet a few quaking hearts there are that question its expediency. Let such remember that the event of every innovation whose spring is justice can safely be left with the One Just. In Johnson's "Rasselas," one aged philosopher eloquently insisted that the true way to be prosperous and happy was to live according to Nature, though his explanation of what "Life according to Nature" might be, was not clear enough to recommend itself as practicable to his would-be disciple, yet the wise seeker never doubted the happy results of a life so lived. We have good reason to think that we are beginning to live "according to Nature" when we begin to aim to accomplish the declared purposes of the Creator of Nature. Hitherto we have opposed that design, that gave woman for a helpmeet, since one can scarcely be a helpmeet in what one knows nothing of. In opening the Universities, and giving the ballot to women, will the world be acting in sympathy with that spirit: for when women are allowed to be helpmeets in the preparations for life, then, and only can then, can they they hope to become fit help-meets in life itself.We accept this gift, not as the boom of Regents or Legislators, noble donors though they would be, but as the gift of the New Year, whose first month has ripened this fruit of Justice. Should each one of January's eleven successors ripen as golden an apple, the fruitage of December would be the Ballot.To the daughters of New York, the girls of Michigan send greeting, hoping that what Ann Arbor has become to us, Ithaca will soon become to them; viz., an inspiration and a fulfillment. A fulfillment of one aim, an inspirer of many higher ones.February 1st, 1870.M.E. WrightBACK AGAIN.Mary SquiresBACK AGAIN.THE clouds were slowly falling in slender threads of rain;And here and there a patch of snow was in the road and lane.Mists had wrapped the maples, and so brown and sere the grass,It seemed the weary Winter would never, never pass.And I, beside the window, was thinking of it all,How every Spring seemed later, and so early came the Fall,That scarce the joyous Summer had wakened all the flowers,Ere Autumn garnered in her grain, and chilled the glowing hours.When -- sweet as voice of Summer -- I thought I heard a call;And hastened to the doorway, nor spoke a word at all;For I thought, perhaps my fancy has trifled with my ear;And I'll be very certain; before I tell he's here.So I looked around the garden, and up the locusts bare,I searched the golden willows, the maple tree and pear,And nowhere could I find him; yet still with glances keenI hunted through the chestnut, the rose and evergreen.His Summer haunts, the cherry trees, were standing still and bare,And not leaf was on the peach -- he was not hidden there;So I said in tones impatient, "it was some other sound," -- Then -- such a warbling whistle! my heart it gave a bound.I turned with eager glances, and there, as plain as day,Stood Robin on the gable of the house across the way,The trees so bare and lifeless, snow patches on the sward,It seemed a sorry welcome for Rob, the gallant bird.But Robin, never heeding, shook his golden-breasted coat;And ran along the slat roof, and trilled his joyous note.I was so glad to hear him, for he whistled of the daysOf roses all a-blossom, and cherries all ablaze --That I half forgot the Winter, its weariness and pain,And shouted through the doorway, "the Robin's here again!"MARY SQUIRES.THE LEGAL STATUS OF WOMAN.SECOND PAPER.FROM what has been laid down we are prepared to see, that the status of married women first occupied the attention of law reformers; and that changes have been chiefly confined to matters pertaining to their private rights. Unmarried women under the Common Law occupied a sufficiently advanced position to soon demand recognition in the public forum. Christian, one of the learned annotators of Blackstone's Commentaries, admitted that there appeared to be "no substantial reason why single women should be denied the privilege of voting." But the status of the single woman was neutralized by that of the wife. The latter was so much lower, that on its more glaring imperfections was centered public notice, while the former remained fixed, and served as a sort of model by which to shape reform. Changes have heretofore been directed towards enabling the married woman to act as a feme sole; and it is not until married and single women stand more nearly upon the some legal footing, that the reform commences in earnest in behalf of the individual woman as such, and includes in its measures public as well as private rights.As we now contemplate the advance which has been made in the position of Woman before the law, we are struck with the, in-

directness with which has been worked out the reform. At no time have changes been made upon any comprehensive, philosophic plan, but each has been the result of some present, pressing demand, and adopted as an isolated matter of expediency. As we look at these measures separately, the thread of progress seems at times to be lost, or again, while standing out distinctly, it appears to follow an uncertain and devious way; but looking at them as a whole, we see a steady development of the principle that must ultimately prevail. Such a course of development is, indeed, observable in all important things. It takes years of indirect endeavor in the line of present, shifting expediency, before the world settles down upon lasting principles.A glance at some of the innovations upon the strict Common Law theory of "marital power," will serve to bring out more clearly these features of our subject.The doctrine of fines and recoveries was the foundation for one of the earliest established exceptions to the rule of the wife's disability, and it well illustrates how changes of this nature are first brought about. As before mentioned, the husband, by the Common Law, had an usufructuary interest only in the wife's real estate. The fee remained in her. But, under the strict application of the maxim that "a married woman cannot contract," there was no way in which she could convey it. There was a practical inconvenience in this, and so the aid of this singular judicial contrivance was invoked to do what was forbidden. It consisted of one string of fictions from beginning to end, on the basis of which the title to the wife's land could be changed on the records of the court. These records were considered as proving, first, that the land did not belong to the wife; and second, that in so far as she had any action in the matter it was the action of a feme sole. The idea seemed to be, to carry back, by means of fictions, the new circumstances to the old, unsuitable law, rather than to bring the law up to correspond with the new circumstances; and in this way jurists reasoned themselves around the truth that a change was demanded, or the fact that any change had been made. And indeed, this process does not present any very open acknowledgment of the rights of the wife. Its purpose was to free the title of land, and not to enable the wife to act. But, under the guise

of denial it brought about, in part a recognition of her claims and forms, in fact, "a very important exception to the general rule."Another innovation sprang, as the courts say, "from the necessity of the case." In cases  where the husband abjured or was banished the realm, the wife was allowed to act as a single woman. The theory of the law that she had a sufficient protector was too palpably false not to demand some practical modification. But this change was allowed to go no further than could be done and yet remain apparently consistent with the legal theory of unity -- for there was no thought of changing that. Lord Coke explained it in the logical way, that as the law no longer knew the husband, the wife was legally sole, and could therefore act accordingly; and, says Dervey, J. (in Ames v. Chew, 5 Meet. 321,) "her legal protector being civilly dead, she resumes her individual legal capacity to enter into contracts, to make acquisitions of property, and to sue and be sued." Lord Mansfield, ever so ready to catch the spirit of the times, thought the advance of society demanded the extension of this principle of innovation to every case where the wife lived separate and apart from her husband, and endeavored to establish such a doctrine in the law. But conservative jurists took the alarm, and the doctrine of Mansfield was overthrown, and the law, as it was expressed by a celebrated judge, "restored from the changes, which great men had incautiously introduced into it." The change was carefully confined to strict analogies, and though the husband might be imprisoned, or leave the State and remain abroad, without providing for the wife, yet if he continued a subject of its laws he was still her "legal protector," and she had no power to act for herself. It will be noticed, in all this, how carefully was avoided making any direct attack upon marital rights; and yet it was quite a cutting away of the outskirts of the boundaries which divided the status of married and single women.Another of the early innovations upon the legal nonentity theory of the Common Law, was that peculiar one known as the 'Pin Money trust," -- which was a certain yearly allowance to be used by the wife as her own, for the purpose of buying dress and personal ornaments. It bears on its face the stamp of an origin in opinions formed under the education of the old system; the

husband would not wish to be troubled with matters so beneath the dignity of his station, but they were considered necessary to the appearance of his establishment. "It is," says the judge in the leading case upon the subject, "for the establishment whose strength and support is the husband, but whose ornament is the wife." This well illustrates the relative positions assigned to the husband and wife, and is an index to quite a commentary. The Pin Money trust was but a slight advance towards a recognition of the individual existence of the wife, and had no such end in view; her management of the allowance was confined to a very limited sphere, but in so far as it went, it treated the wife as a person capable of acting for herself.A more radical change which may be noticed is the one known as the "separate use trust," which has played so important a part in the history of the law. This was nothing more than a cumbersome way of giving the use and benefit of certain property to the wife, as an individual distinct from her husband. It was effected through the medium of the Court of Equity. This court practically acted as a sort of mediator between old and out-grown rules and a later civilization. By the former was maintained the oneness of the husband and wife; by the latter was faintly realized, that the making one of two persons a cipher for the sake of unity, was more logical than just. Equity, to harmonize the two views, built up a supplementary system of rules, based upon the doctrine of trusts, which, while it followed the law in form, reflected public opinion in substance. People could not see why a wife living entirely separate from her husband should not be allowed to own and act separately from him; and again, anxious parents and friends felt that there should be some way in which a wife could be secured in a support by means of a separate property, in case the husband, to whom the law made her look, should prove to be careless, reckless or profligate. The law allowed nothing of the kind; equity provided a way in which the law might be evaded and the desired result brought about. From this double system, built up of such different elements, sprang that curious medley of rules relating to married women which, in their complications and refinements, are bewildering even to the professional student. Without following out here the details of this system, we may col-

lect from the general result, that equity allowed the wife, in some cases, to own property as though she were single, and, in a great measure, to act with reference to it as if she were unmarried. "In equity, a feme covert can be considered as a feme sole.It is not to be supposed that such changes as these could take place without opposition., There are always those who see or imagine greater risk in the adoption of new rules, than in the evils under the established law; and who would --"Rather bear those ills they have
Than fly to others that they know not of."Jurists were not wanting, therefore, to lament the tearing away of old landmarks in the status of married women; and courts now and then took a bold stand against the current of innovation. The early case in Connecticut of Dibble v Hutton, 1 Day 221, is a notable instance of this in our own country. The Court in this case took the broad ground, that we ought not to adopt the principles which governed the English Court of Chancery, with reference to married women, but that we ought to return to the simpler rules of the Common Law. But the current of progress was altogether too strong to be checked by any such conservative barriers. Still, in this, as in every change, we see the force and influence of the old system. The antiquated customs yet remained the rule, and the innovations were the exceptional cases. It had clearly to be stated that property was intended for the separate use of the wife, or the husband took it as a matter of course; and the wife, in no case had any general power to act, but only in special instances, with reference to her separate use-property. Indeed, while allowing the wife to act within certain limits, the allowance was tinctured with the idea that she should occupy a subordinate position. Thus, there was a tendency to look upon the separate property of the wife as a trust fund set apart and to be controlled by the court for her protection. The idea seemed to be, not to give personal liberty to the wife, but to follow the theory of protection under a change of protectors. It is this which gives force to the indignant protest of Mrs.Dall: "This very protection is insulting; for it treats the wife as if she must of necessity be either an inert instrument in the hands of her husband, or a dupe whose weakness he might readily abuse," ("College, Market and

Court," 279). In the carrying out of this theory, the have been presented some curious features. For instance, at the same time it was required that the wife should obtain the husband's assent to a conveyance of her property, it was thought necessary to oblige her to go separate and apart from him and acknowledge the conveyance to be made of her own free will and without any influence on his part: these two rules being founded on the twin reasons, that, by the first, it is shown that the husband was near to protect the wife against others, and by the second, it is proved that the husband was away and others near to protect the wife against him. Truly a very neat and consistent system of protection! Much of this may be seen in other rules; on the one hand, the husband being looked upon as the one to whom should be intrusted the control of the wife, and, on the other hand, as being about the only person against whom she should be protected -- not a very flattering comment on the marital relations. This is something, however, which is to be expected. Excess in one way leads to excess in the opposite direction. Seeing the wife abused "under the power," the use of which was abuse, it was easy to first think of guarding against the abuse, rather than of abolishing the cause, and to frame rules with that end in view.From out of this confusion resulting from the acting of two powers over the married woman, finally dawns the simpler truth that she can best act for herself. Blindly as it has been done, we see in the past a constant incorporation of individuality into the legal status of Woman. Every step, however guarded, and with whatever intent taken, so far as it recognized the wife as some one distinct from the husband as an individual, is seen to be a step in the right direction. And the general result plainly appears, that the status of Woman, more imperfect than that of Min, and, in which a wide gap existed between the positions of married and single women, has been undergoing a constant reparation, and the gap, in a meeasure, but somewhat crudely bridged over.It is at this point, i.e., when married women are enabled to do, by different and contradictory rules, what should be allowed by one simple law, that the present period of legislation begins and, following the spirit of the innovations to the old law, forms a new code more directly advancing the status of Woman. It is a most important period, and is deserving of notice in a separate paper.THE METROPOLIS.William P. TomlinsonCITY of Pomp and showStrange union of extremes!How much of joy and woe;In thy vast bosom teems!A boastful nation's pride,Beyond compeer thou art;Within thy broad bay rideThe ships of every mart.Thou art to commerce wed,And known to every shore,Where boastful sail is spread,Or seaman dare explore.The lover of the muse,Of science, or of art,In thy vast bosom woosThe mistress of his heart.The ceaseless roar of trade,From morning until night,Makes country lad or maidStand oft in mute affright.But while so much that's fairTo outward meets the eye,Grim poverty and care,And want and woe are nigh.For scarce the shadow thrown,From yonder stately rowOf palaces of stoneDoth fall to earth below,Ere it doth dark'ning restOn hovels all forlorn,Where want is aye a guestAnd vice from woe is born.There half-starved children roveWithout a sire or name,And wanton mothers move,Dead to all sense of shame.Not in the world beside,Is darker, fouler blot;Yet aye life's restless tideSwells by and heeds it notOh, why in Christian land,Must ever we behold,Where virtue should command,Such misery untold?Surely some blessed time,Is yet for man in store,When want, and woe, and crime,Will vex the earth no more.A glorious city, weShall look on in that day,For all the ills that beWill then be swept away.WILLIAM P. TOMLINSON.EVERY NEED PROPHETIC.Samuel C. BlackwellTHERE is a prophecy that never fails. When a generation so perceives the need of a reform that its discussion is characteristic of the period, a new order is certain as the morrow. In 1870, at least throughout Christendom, the question is fairly mooted: "What is the natural scope of woman's life?" Its plain statement goes straight to its solution. Child and philosopher alike reply: "The natural scope of woman's life must be whatever her nature prompts and can achieve." Of the prompting, each individual woman must be sole judge; her capacity trial must decide. What this prophecy foretells, and history will record, is that individual women will attempt more and different attainments, and society will accord to them more and different facilities. For while to men as men, society has never said concerning its vital interests, such as vocation, education and religion, "Thus far shalt thou go but no farther," to women as women society has always uttered that stern decree. It was a harsh edict for the hundreds who in the past have met it and yielded. It is tyrannous for the thousands who now meet it and protest. It would be intolerable for the millions who would meet it in the future; therefore the prohibition must itself yield. For as the woman of this age wakes to the consciousness of power, an angel gentle as the dawn but strong as fate walks by her side -- the angel's name is Duty.We may call him visionary or we may call him genius who perceives and shows a special need, striking a key note which the horizon echoes; yet the echo justifies his prophecy. This is not fancy but plain fact. It is not necessary to point to the experience of ancient days. Events of our familiar century, which our fathers told us as we ran beside them in the streets and fields; which we heard from our mothers as we sat by their knee; events which our own eyes have witnessed and our own hearts pondered, attest that sure satisfaction awaits each genuine want.It was a felt need in the age of Louis and of George, which penned Burns' startling lyric "the man's the gowd for a' that," and which wrote and sang the Marseillaise. The time had come. Quick breeding thoughts clustered about topics previously speculative and these became strangely

practical. Those men of 1790 saw Thermopylae in Boston, in Paris, in London, on English farms, and among New England hills. Granted allegiance due to government and law; but what is that divinely sanctioned Government; what is that immutable and sacred Law? Surely not the "L'Etat c'est moi" claimed by the elder Louis, and assumed by the younger; surely not hanging for the theft of sixpence inflicted by a woolly-headed judge. A need was recognized in France in 1793, and though overturn after overturn has failed thus far to crown the rightful sovereign, the end is not yet and meanwhile the Louis' can be repeated no more. The English echo reverberates, leaping from one "Reform Bill" to another. Victoria, contemplating English Common Schools and Irish Land Reform, stands far away from the footing of her grandfather, "Great George our King," with his arrogant "what, what, what," and his tradition-haunted empire. Victoria will pass as the Georges have passed, but England's Common Schools and Ireland's Land Reform once initiated, are these doomed to give place again to the cannibal system of Entail and Primogeniture, or will Intellect be crushed back to Charity schools again?In 1770, Granville Sharpe thought and wrote against the slave trade. Two years later, Mansfield freed the fugitive Somerset holding his master's claim inconsistent with England's Common Law of freedom. Cowper sang of liberty --"The flowerThat lends to fleeting life its luster and perfume."The English nursery wept for the "little slave that labors in the sun." In 1790 Clarkson fastened on the slave trade like destiny. In 1807 Wilberforce carried its abolition through Parliament. In 1834 England paid twenty million pounds, the price of blood, and let her slaves go free. We say "the thing that has been is the thing that shall be," but will England enslave the African again?Romilly, descended from the Huguenots, felt the need of law that should challenge loyalty and deter from crime. In 1810, Lord Holland moved the repeal of death as penalty for stealing the value of five shillings privately in a shop substituting transportation for life. Every big wig spoke, or "the Constitution" and Lord-Holland's motion was quashed. But the key note had sounded. The heart in England's families and the church in England's church echoed "good will to men." Romilly, before

he died in 1818, had swept away the five shilling death penalty, with most of the kindred paltry "felonies," so called. Mackintosh and his successors have remodelled English criminal law in the fifty years that have elapsed since then. Henceforth there will never fail in the bar of Christendom thoughtful men proposing yet more perfect "law reform."John Howard, sheriff in 1773, sought precedent for prison reform in Bedfordshire by visiting the jails of the other counties, and found instead abuses deep and universal, which his seventeen remaining years were spent in making known and in seeking mitigate and to reform. Still, in 1813, Elizabeth Fry found in Newgate three hundred women prisoners crowded together without classification, without bedding, in dirt and rags, with only the floor to rest upon. She spent thirty precious years of her maturity to introduce into the English prisons, employment and schools, and to bespeak the sympathy of family and church for the most destitute of England's poor. And now, though England's poverty and crime are still appalling, her charities are more nearly superhuman than the world has elsewhere witnessed hitherto; while so long as jails continue necessary evils, humane men and women will maintain the acknowledged duty of "prison reform."In 1760, James Watt felt the need of something more than man's hand or slowly toiling horse to do the hard work and cunning handicraft of civilization, (be it ever remembered that at the basis of civilization as contrasted with barbarism, lies work, hard, systematic, perpetual work), the need of swifter agents than the stage or ship to speed the thoughts and carry the products of Christendom. He thought and tried. His thought and trial were as a prayer prompted by Heaven and by Heaven answered. Unbelieving critics spent their wit and exercised their art in depicting flying tea-kettles, bursting bubbles and hot water performing all the grotesque pranks conceivable of sputtering fluid and thin air. Yet in 1765 the sleepless piston learned to play. This was the natal year of Fulton, and the older and the younger apostle of the new power gave their lives to the application of the great idea. In 1836 the Sirius steamed across the Atlantic and dropped anchor in New York Bay. Thirty years have passed, and now half the human race is clad by looms driven by fuel from pre-Adamite forests, acting on water old as the planet, through metal formed in the laboratory of the most ancient

world. These far-fetched forces, summoned by man's need, traverse all the earth to gather materials for modern industry, and to distribute its products over the globe. After a hundred years, the want interpreted by Watts still fills the Earth with wonder at Nature's liberal response; but Punch's predecessors, a century since, drawing bursting tea-kettles in derision of a monomaniac, where are they?Jefferson, who, looking at the Virginia slave, trembled when he remembered that God is just, yet slept in peace one happy night in 1787, after the good day's work of engrafting freedom in the organic law of our Western territory. Two years later, Franklin, president of his abolition society, memorialized Congress to exert its utmost power to discourage the traffic in men. Washington at the same time was hoping against hope that some measure might be devised to abolish slavery by law. These men, with many less prominent than they, felt the vital need of consistency for freedom. Thirty years lulled that generation to its rest, but bred in countless younger hearts freedom's extinguishable life. In 1830 Garrison tolled the bell. The land echoed. Not the market place, not the court house, but the family and the true church heard and listened, and after other thirty years, when the great error rose up organized as the Great Apostasy, the little leaven of the Republic's earlier day had spread so far that the North laid down life for life, and the ark of freedom emerged from that last ordeal not only saved but we hope immortal. We say "history repeats itself," but will America enslave the African again?Is there a brother of sisters stepping forth into the world, who does not see that he has facilities which they have not, yet of which they stand in as urgent want as he? Is there a father of daughters, who, thinking of the time when his hand shall have forgot its cunning, does not feel the need of a larger scope and a surer guarantee of independence for the dear children who will soon be women and perhaps alone? Is this, which the brother and the father feel, not felt by women? Is it not a real need?Has the still small voice effectually plead for the despised commons, plucking Off the hereditary crown and hailing these as sovereigns; has it unseated the ermined despot and guarded the poor man's life, by a jury of his fellows? Has it called forth from the latent ingenuity of man

the mighty engines he required to supplement his strength? Has it rescued from the triple fangs of wealth and prejudice and power, the helpless slave? Be sure the same gentle potency holds in its gift a better lot; when arbitrary restrictions whether of statute or of prejudice shall be withdrawn; when nature, which is Providence, shall welcome women to every worthy industry, to all material success, and to their full stature in the thoughts and purposes of mental life: an order of intelligence and independence, enlarging Duty, transforming Society, ennobling Home, and fulfilling dream and prayer in a true Commonwealth. In every need dwells prophecy.SAMUEL C. BLACKWELLPROFESSIONAL QUACKS.Jane O. De ForestPEOPLE of education should be, and generally are, the most liberal in
their views, and the most helpful in advancing the welfare of the human race. One naturally expects intolerance and persecution from those whose minds are dwarfed and bent by gross ignorance; those who have never felt the blessed and enriching influence of that knowledge which has such a power to elevate and ennoble the heart. Especially do we look for broad charity and generous consideration from those who claim not merely the refinements of education, but the enlightenment of a pure Christianity. And, we do not seek it in vain, as the lives of hosts of noble men and women testify, who are aiding in all reforms which promise to benefit mankind. There are others who, though they do not endorse new and ultra views with readiness, still exhibit such kindly and liberal feelings; such evident willingness that success should attend everything which proves to be right, that we can but love and respect them, and pray that their eyes may be opened, that they "shall see and believe."But when ministers of the Gospel, would-be doctors, and certain members of editorial staffs, throw off all sanctity and every appearance of gentlemen, and with reckless vituperation assail the noble women who are, to-day, battling bravely for what they sincerely believe neces-

sary to a more perfect elevation of their sex; we feel that education and religion wholly has failed to make these persons aught that is noble and
good, but rather that, with all their learning and titles, they are mere Professional Quacks.When the unwashed citizen, with his ponderous frame and brutal face gravely declares that, "he won't take any paper for which women write," or the leather-faced Vermonter says that, "he wouldn't live with his wife an hour, if she ever wanted to vote," or the young dandy asserts that, "the idea of letting women vote is really a little too ridiculous, for they haven't sufficient brains, sah!" -- we may smile and exclaim, "What a fearful blocking of the wheels of progress!" But when Doctors of Divinity insultingly talk and write of the advocates of Woman Suffrage as being "a low company;" abuse our noble leaders by calling them free-lovers and opposers of the divine institution of marriage, and call some of the most gentle and refined ladies in the land "strapping 'Amazons,' who go about haranguing for their rights, to the neglect of other duties;" we are sure that forbearance has ceased to be a virtue, and that these clerical charletans should receive at least a portion of the contempt and indignation which they so richly deserve.As we have previously said, we all respect those who treat our views candidly, and give in kindness their serious objections to them; but when men pour forth their venomous and spiteful spleen upon our devoted heads, and by personal slander seek to destroy the influence of our beloved leaders; then it is that we can most heartily say, "You self-righteous hypocrites, you do always pervert the labors of those who do not choose to obey your dictum. You are a disgrace to the progressive age in which you live, and the privileges which have been yours in this free country, won for you by the women as much as by the men of this goodly land. And inasmuch as you have basely slandered pure and noble women, we pronounce you also a disgrace to the mothers who bore you. You need not hope, however, to stop agitation and prevent the success which will as surely attend our efforts as there is a just and loving Father and Saviour above. Never! for as certainly as the principles of justice and freedom are as firm as the everlasting bills, so certainly shall we win the victory. We believe that the Right is on our side,

and with energy and courage we 'intend to fight it out on this line' if it takes all our life-time. We are splendidly officered and are getting well drilled, so that your traitorous shots are by no means demoralizing our ranks, but rather are inspiring our hearts with renewed vigor and determination. When you so forget all that is becoming to professedly Christian gentlemen, all that native manliness and even common decency requires, as to deliberately and publicly villify those whose lives and characters you know to be above reproach; then it is that you place yourselves for a certainty, on a par with the gross and brutal."The medical students who have recently so basely insulted those brave women, who are striving to secure that knowledge which shall alone prevent their sex from longer being the victims of vile and unscrupulous men, who have so often filled the ranks of this profession, have received an almost unanimous scathing from the press. We hope these individuals, these "lewd fellows of the baser sort," will be marked and remembered, and that when they go forth from college walls, and expect to flourish the M. D., all respectable women will shun them as they would the plague, and show them by every act, that those who are guilty of such deeds, are not the ones to be received and employed as family physicians.Certain editors also, who have never lost an opportunity in endeavoring to heap ridicule and contumely upon the cause of Woman Suffrage, exhibit a littleness of soul which, as another says, "might hop away on a pair of flea's legs." If they cannot or will not agree with us, let them in all fairness so express themselves, but let them recollect that when they resort to slang and slander, they descend from the position of legitimate journalists, to that of editorial mountebanks. The advocates of our cause are willing to meet every objection fairly and squarely; they are and expect to be, kindly considerate toward all candid and sincere opposers; but at the same time they do not intend that those who have striven to overthrow their work in so shameful a manner shall go "unwhipped of justice."Women of America! you can see in these base efforts, a strong evidence of the tyrannical spirit which has so long ruled by brute force; which still would insist that the laws of the Dark Ages should govern

the people of to-day, and which foams and tears in its fear of being exorcised. But the day is coming, and that right speedily, when the mighty voice of Universal Suffrage shall command it to "come forth and depart from hence;" and not till then shall we expect to see these Professional Quacks "clothed and in their right mind."JANE 0. DE FOREST.THE DIAMOND PIN.AnelihpESQUIRE CATLIN, at the close of his Lyceum lecture, astounded the young ladies of Kittery, by the announcement that a diamond pin of the value of five hundred dollars would be presented to any lady answering correctly one hundred questions, put to her by a Committee of ten gentlemen, to be drawn from the audience by the donor upon the opening of the examination. A single failure was to subject the candidate to withdrawal.Horticultural Hall never presented such a cheery appearance as it did on that June evening of examination. The examination not being restricted to the Kittery Demoiselles, some thirty presented themselves from the neighboring metropolis. A hidden hope was in the feminine heart whilst the Committee were being chosen, a hope, as the sequel proved, poorly anchored. The Committee were, all but one, graduates of some college, the uneducated member was a plain country farmer. First chosen, he was first to propound a question. The lady who ascended the platform first, was the daughter of a city millionaire. Her train extended half the length of the stage. Her diamonds were resplendent. Surely she could not covet the pin, for she wore one whose middle stone was quite large, surrounded by smaller ones, like stars revolving around a central sun. The lady gracefully accepted the chair presented, and awaited questions."How many eggs will a well-to-do hen average during her natural life?" asked the farmer. A storm of laughter burst from the well packed audience; it was electrical, the Committee joining in chorus. The chair was vacated instanter, and so rapid was the flight that the edge of the train disappeared before the audience had checked their risibility.The next aspirant was country born, but city bred. To the question where Ursa Major or the Great Bear was situated, she replied, in Africa. It was apparent that the heavens had not declared to her, "the glory of God." She sat very composedly awaiting the next question, when she was tapped on the shoulder

by one of the Kittery's loveliest daughters, who answered two questions, but blundered on the third - Where was Arcturus? It was a mountain of Asia, she replied. One of Hogarth's satirical painting's hung upon the walls, and had been there for years. Miss Jenkins was asked, Who was Hogarth? She couldn't tell unless he was one of the Puritans who came over in the Mayflower -- an illustration of, "and seeing, ye see not." Her successor was asked to define Chronology -- no reply. It is the science of determining, what sort of dates? asked her interlocutor. Such as they sell at groceries? she queried. Suffice it to say there were sixty-five occupants of the chair, exhausting all the ladies presenting themselves, and but ten questions were correctly answered.Esquire Catlin came forward and expressed regret that the pin should remain in his hands, and earnestly hoped that some one would yet appear to win and wear it, and suggested, as the meeting was interesting to the people, that a vote be taken that it be adjourned to the following Wednesday. At this point he was stayed in his proceeding by Mrs. Catlin's ascending the stage, leading by the hand a very brilliant but modest looking brunette, the teacher of a select school in Kittery. The Committee grouped around the Esquire were startled by his sudden ejaculation of, "The mischief." Very gracefully did Mrs. Catlin introduce the forlorn hope, who, when a chair was offered her, declined it, saying, "I shall take my exodus too soon to need it."There was a smile on many faces when, the farmer again asked, How many eggs will a well-to-do hen lay during her natural life? Her modest answer was from her experience in feeding hens and gathering their eggs when a child on a plantation, (another ejaculation from the Esquire) she would say they never exceeded two hundred, oftener less. "Good," said the man of acres, "I hope you'll get the pin."They had been unsuccessfully canvassing Kittery for funds for a cemetery, their old burying ground being unfit for farther occupancy. The brunette was called upon by a poetical member of the Committee to recite some poem to advance the cause. She selected, "The Old Burying Ground," from Whittier. It was received with much applause, and was instrumental in procuring funds for a new cemetery, with an iron fence instead of a "winding wall of mossy stone," frost-flung and broken, wherein no horse could drag his fetlock chain, no cow-bell tinkle slow, nor sheep like white ghosts come and go. This member of the Committee was engaged to a very wealthy and aristocratic lady, and although she was his inferior in talent and character, yet it was often remarked in Kittery, that she demeaned herself by the connection. This gentleman called upon the

brunette for some quotation. Quick as thought she gave one from Amy Wentworth:"Never maiden stoops to him
Who lifts himself to her."One of the Committee asked her to recite something else. She gave, "What the Birds Said." When she uttered these words: -- "they sang, the freedman's song,
The crash of broken locks" -- there was another ejaculation from the Esquire, reminding many that he was not a partaker in "the country's sunset fair," nor its evening light."Ply her with hard questions, make her miss," whispered the Esquire. This, he was informed, would infringe his own rules; they were to ask only such questions as well educated, practical young ladies would be supposed to know.The Principal of the Academy put scientific questions; she answered them all correctly. One of the Committee, somewhat noted for doing his own thinking, inquired, If she believed that in Adam's fall we sinned all? She believed, she said, "that in Adam's fall we sinned not at all." The dissimilar questions of the Committee had all been answered to their satisfaction, when a voice from the crowd inquired her age.She smiled as she replied, "twenty-nine, and please remember, friends, what Byron said, that 'age is honorable when no attempt is made to modernize it.'"Another voice called out, "where did you come from to Kittery?" Without answering, she turned an imploring look towards Mrs. Catlin. That lady rose, and, passing to the front of the stage, replied, "My friend, Dacotta Catlin, now shielded by our banner of Freedom and Right, once brought the market price of human flesh. By marriage, I claim her as kith and kin. She is an illegitimate child of my husband's uncle, and, after his death, was sold to pay his son's excesses in college. Her purchaser, -- God bless him! for though a slaveholder, he has a vital soul and heart, -- at my intercession gave her free papers, and was at the expense of her removal here; where she has, as you all well know, dwelt among you in all honor, teaching your children as none other has ever taught them, never shrinking when the pestilence was among us, but braving with
gentle ministration, where manly hearts dared not brave, tenements foul with disease and death. Miss Catlin's father felt that he lessened his sin by caring tenderly for her; by educating her himself, and his intention was to have secured her freedom. But the Lord of the harvest spares not the lax, and he was garnered in his pride of strength, with no time to lament his delay."Mrs. Catlin bowed and withdrew, leaving the impression on the audience of 
a woman nobly planned," of a second Griffith, "an honest chronicler." It

was immediately voted that the Diamond Pin had been honorably won, and the community seemed well pleased that one who fulfilled life's duties so well should become its possessor. The Esquire's presentation was somewhat curt; fact and feeling manifestly revealing the perturbed state of his mind; his heart was playing old tunes, but to a new measure.By marriage, Esquire Catlin had acquired beauty, goodness and knowledge. These "sisters three," dwelling under the same roof were insensibly moulding him anew. When Miss Catlin appeared in Kittery he urged upon the possessor of these virtues the policy of ignoring her, but he soon learned that politic measures were no lever to move her, and not to lessen himself estimation, he must loosen his hold of such morality and grasp the rule of right. No guerdon he could offer could induce her to cease righting the wronged. She had her hidden hope -- may her time of rejoicing come when both are anchored in well-doing -- "The joy that mixes man with heaven."In closing, I would say that the meeting was of great importance to the inhabitants of Kittery, for, in revealing the paucity of the young ladies' attainments thus publically, it turned their attention from frivolity to a real pursuit of knowledge. Every available evening now is devoted to the study of some science, thus lifting the burden under which they have grovelled."They have never wanted the ballot," said the Esquire, "but they are coming up to the mark now.""The hours that have perished, and been laid to their charge," replied Mrs. Catlin "are being redeemed."ANELIHPTHROWN UPON THE WORLD.
PART EIGHTH.THROUGHOUT the hours of that sunny Spring day, following the departure of De L'Estrange, the two girls remained essentially alone. Occasionally,, to attend to some department of labor especially her province, or to give directions concerning some more particular work, Marian would beg her new-found friend to excuse her while she passed into the outer room from whence proceeded the busy click of type dropping, ceaselessly and methodically, into the "sticks" of the light-hearted and occasionally talkative compositors; but as quickly as possible she would discharge her task and hasten back to the little alcove where, with

beaming face, sat her companion eager to resume the interrupted thread of conversation.Upon how many subjects did they discourse during that May day, so fair without, so sunny forever in the memory of Marian? Scarcely noted by either were the light-winged hours as they stole away. All their past lives, so dissimilar in surroundings, so alike in aspirations and heroic purpose - were unveiled to each other. Of her early girlhood, her arrival a stranger in the metropolis, and the subsequent incidents of her not uneventful life, our somewhat reserved Marian found herself speaking with a freedom and minuteness of detail which she would have deemed strange at an ordinary moment, but which in the unrestrained tide of revelation on the part of her bright, sunny-spirited companion seemed wholly proper and but a just equivalent of confidence. Strange indeed, almost like the unfolding of some fairy tale, seemed the brief life of that fair, young girl as poured into the ear of the sympathetic, eagerly listening Marian. But little had she known of Mina Graves beyond the knowledge afforded by the chance newspaper paragraphs which, from time to time, had caught her eye, powerfully exciting her interest in the "child sculptor." She knew that she was one of earth's royally gifted, that success after success had been achieved by her in her art, that even at that moment she stood charged with a commission by the government which rendered her at once the object of admiration and of envy by thousands; but how she had climbed those dizzy heights of prosperity and fame, what advantages she had enjoyed, or how much was due to her own unaided exertions, Marian hitherto had possessed no means of knowing."Yes, my dear friend," Mina impulsively uttered, in dwelling upon some of the incidents of her early life, "like yourself, I was country born, and of parents in very reduced circumstances. When I was a child, ten years of age, my father, then living in an Eastern village, accepted the situation of a clerk at an Indian agency upon our Western frontier; and six or more years of my life -- all the period intervening between careless childhood and our removal to Washington, some two years since -- were spent in living a life of almost unrestrained nature. Poor as we were, in that land of few wants and of easily obtained food, we felt none of the stings of ordinary poverty. There was but little for

me to do at that period; my parents were indulgent, and all the time not devoted to study under their supervision, was at my absolute disposal. Several times, in the course of those half dozen years, my poor, toil-worn father changed his abode - tossed by the adverse changes of administration, or lured by the hope of bettering his fortunes -- but we never, by any chance, approached the East; continually we hovered upon the frontier. Ah, my friend, I scarcely need say to you what a charm that nomadic life possessed for an imaginative, unformed girl! Untamed, almost, as the Sioux or Comanches, -- who roved the plains, and who were almost our only visitors, -- half my life was spent in the open air. I had but few books, and no society; but I was rarely happy even without the possession of either. I made friends of objects animate and inanimate; the streams, groves and whispering winds became my companions; on those free, broad prairies instinct with life, surrounded by those glorious charms of landscape, I was never lonely. Tenfold more solitary have I often felt in some city of the East -- perchance amid the glare of some ball-room, or fashionable reception -- than I ever felt in those early girlhood days, even when roaming alone, with no human being within miles of the haunt I had chosen. Ah, those days, how my very spirit longs, at times, for a return of their wrapt enjoyment! So time passed on. You have asked me how early I began to exercise my art. I cannot remember the period when the beautiful, whether portrayed upon canvas, carved in statue, or spread abroad in landscape, had not a charm, an indescribable fascination, for me; or when I did not strive, in some childish, untaught way, to reproduce what I so much admired in nature or in art. Still, until recently, I may say that my predilections were more for the brush than the ruder carver of the sculptor. Indeed, such a thing as distinction in the latter had never flashed across my mind, even in those imaginings of the possible which come to us with the temptation of indulgement which we cannot resist. With the brush, working without a master, and with such few materials and accessories for study as I could command, I had achieved tolerable success, although conscious of the commonplace character of my work, and inly tormented with the sense or conviction -- call it, my dear Marian, what you may! -- that there was something for which I was more truly fitted, -- called by my maker to do, -- and of which my spirit went in cease-

less quest. As a portrait, or even as a landscape painter, -- for it was for the latter I displayed the greater aptitude, -- I know I never should have attained success more than respectable; but in an hour I dreamed not of the turning point in my life came, and henceforth I had no doubt as to my mission. Shortly after our removal to Washington, and while I was yet in possession of the clerkship in one of the Departments, which, fortunately, I had early been able to secure, I accompanied Mr. R---, the well-known member of the House, to the Capitol to see some of the works of Mr. Mills, the famous sculptor. It was my first visit to the studio of an artist, and my first more than hurried inspection of the Capitol; and I can recall, as vividly as though it were but yesterday, the mingled emotions of awe and half child-like expectation with which I trod those marble floors and wandered along those spacious aisles, so new to me then, but afterwards in all their wilderness of grandeur so familiar. At last -- after pausing sufficiently to admire some of the well-known and much criticised groups of statuary which adorn the Capitol, which to me, then, seemed all that was gloriously beautiful -- we arrived at the door of Mr. Mill's studio. The great master, who was in, received us affably, pointing out his more recent works; and all emotions of awe, which I may have experienced, were speedily lost in the almost intoxication of delight with which my eye drank in those rare conceptions of genius. I have read, my dear friend, of travelers bewildered by the unfolding of the charms of some princely pile, to the enjoyment of the rare beauties of which by the turning of a portal they were suddenly admitted. It was just such a fairy realm that opened before me, absorbing all my faculties, during the rare hour we lingered in Mr. Mill's studio. At last we left, but I carried away each feature, each artistic creation, in brain-haunted memory. Back in my room, I could not rest. The fever of the sculptor was upon me. Within four-and-twenty hours I had persuaded my staunch friend, Mr. R---, to convey to me privately the materials actually needed for a first rough cast, and all the following night, without once closing my eyes in slumber, I toiled at my first figure. I will not weary you, my dear Marian, with the details of my repeated failures to produce aught that was satisfying. Suffice it that when I finally ventured to show my work to Mr. R---, he was so pleased with it that he bore it away in triumph to Mr. Mills, who, I was afterwards

informed, could with difficulty be induced to believe that it was the work of the wholly uninstructed girl who so recently had visited his studio. A little later, I was invited to become his pupil, and many pleasant hours were subsequently spent in his studio, receiving from him the instruction to which I am so largely indebted for whatever I may have since achieved in art."Mina ceased her long narration; to it all her companion had listened with the interest inspired by her sympathy with the heroic, the loftily aspiring, in human nature. For a few moments no words were spoken. Yet more Marian was desirous of hearing, but she forbore, by any question, to divert her friend from the revery into which she had fallen. At last, arousing herself, as by an effort, Mina again spoke, a trace of sadness in her tone, and a half sad expression upon her usually vivacious face:"Ah, Marian! how often have I been spoken of as the 'favorite of fortune,' by those wholly ignorant of my life and its struggles! I know I am the object
of envy to many, but could they know all I have been compelled to undergo -- the annoyances, the misrepresentations, the baffled hopes or strivings -- they would realize the truth of the old saying that, 'every heart knoweth its own bitterness.' Mine, latterly, has been an exposed life. The commission with which I have been intrusted by Congress, which I prize as an expression of confidence, and as furnishing an opportunity for the exercise of my best powers, has caused mot a few of the coarser, more dissolute members, and others, to presume upon many annoying attentions and interruptions to my work, which I have been powerless completely to prevent; and in this way, my dear Marian, I have suffered more than any words of mine, could describe. Among those Senators and Representatives there are, I rejoice to say, men of culture and high honor, as well as of commanding talent. To some of these, for their almost fatherly interest, kindly advice, and judicious criticism of my work, I am unspeakably indebted. But, moving in that Washington life, there are others, high in station, recognized by the world as gentlemen, who have hung as ghouls around my studio; whom my inmost nature loathes as it loathes all that is base and grovelling, and whom I would shut out from my existence as I would all that envy, speaking by manifold tongue or press, has said of me for the last

two years. But I am going away from it all now. My back is turned upon the dear Washington studio. In another clime, surrounded by rarer treasures of art, I must bear my dreams, and attempt the realization of the ideal which is forever before me. I go not as other girls, careless and light of heart, with no purpose but to float gayly upon the broader theater of life. I have renounced the cravings for affection which my heart could so prize, -- the ties of hearth and home will never be mine. I dedicate my life to labor; if I can accomplish this one work as something within me says I shall, I shall be even content with whatever my after life may have in store for me."Again there was a pause, this time broken by the return of De L'Estrange, and after a pleasant conversation of a few moments, the two cousins took their departure, with the promise to call for Marian at the "Home" in the evening to accompany them to an exhibition of choice paintings in an "up-town" gallery which were then attracting the attention of the genuine lovers of art.THE ANGEL'S BLESSING.David PlumbALL night long did Jacob wrestleWith the ANGEL, struggling sore,Wrestled like a brawny AthleteWith his fellow, -- but for more.Let me go I the morning breaketh;Who art thou, to close with me?With Aurora I ascending,Fain would end this strife with thee.So the Angel: for, though stronger,He could not unloose his hold;"No, I will not, till thou bless me,"Said the Wrestler, growing bold.Then persistent Faith and Purpose,Bold celestial strength to dare,Crowned the Wrestler; for 'tis written --So the Angel blessed him there.Challenge, then, 0 Soul, the highest,Sternest Duty, brave to dare;Wrestle with it in the darkness,Through the night, and  ne'er despair.Dawn shall break on thine endeavorFaith and strong, persistent WillShall the sternest Task accomplishDuty's highest claim fulfil.Though thy Work may seem to flout thee,Frown as foe, and say "beware!Let me go!" -- still strive and conquer,Frowning brow shall turn to fair.Every Problem of thy Life-workShrines a Face 'twere joy to see;Holds an ANGEL in disguise there,Solve it, -- and He blesseth thee.DAVID PLUMB.Editorial DepartmentThe American Woman SuffrageSuffage AssociationTHE AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION, organized in Cleveland, November 24th, 1869, will hold a Mass Convention for the advocacy of WOMAN SUFFRAGE, in this city, during Anniversary Week, in Steinway Hall, commencing May 110, at 10 A. M., and continuing, morning, afternoon and evening, May 11th and 12th.It is yet but a few months since we chronicled the organization of this body of earnest men and women, so largely comprising the singleness of purpose and best thought of the Nation; but the progress which has been made in uniting in one solid phalanx the friends of Woman Suffrage, in the concentration of effort, and in winning increased respect for the movement, has been especially gratifying. With but few exceptions, East and West the various State Associations have declared themselves auxiliary to the organization formed at Cleveland; its ranks have received large accessions of the noblest of our representative names; it has held a series of conventions powerfully affecting public opinion; the green hills of Vermont for months have been rendered a battle-ground by tireless devotion, by agency of tongue and press, by all that the exercise of the loftiest talent, coupled with the highest aspiration for the good of humanity, might accomplish,-- the AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION is deeply implanted in the respect and confidence of the American people. As its creation was a national necessity, its brief existence has rebounded to the honor and prosperity of the cause; while its future, under the wise administration of the animating spirits who now shape its counsels and give tone and efficiency to its actions, cannot fail to be as potent for human good.Most cordially do we welcome this Association to our city. New York during Anniversary Week will witness the gathering of many an

august and time-honored assemblage, but to none should it extend a more hearty or appreciative greeting than to this noble body of men and women who will seek it, not in the spirit of controversy, but with no motive but the good of the cause, asking for the speedy enfranchisement of Woman, in the name of the AMERICAN WOMAN SUPFRAGE ASSOCIATION.We herewith; present the call:MASS CONVENTION OF THE AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION.New York, May 11 and 12.A MASS CONVENTION for the advocacy of WOMAN SUFFRAGE, under the auspices of the AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION organized in Cleveland, November 24th, 1869, will be held in the City of NEW YORK during anniversary week, In STEINWAY HALL, commencing May 11, 1870, at 10 A.M., and continuing morning, afternoon and evening, May 11th and 12th. To be followed by a meeting of the Brooklyn Equal Rights Association, at the Academy of Music in Brooklyn, on the 13th inst., morning, afternoon and evening.Rev. Henry Ward Beecher, as President of the AMERICAN WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASSOCIATION, will deliver the opening address.The following eminent advocates of the movement have already engaged to address the convention: -- Henry Ward Beecher, George William Curtis, Julia Ward Howe, William Lloyd Garrison, Mary A. Livermore, Robert Collyer, Lucy Stone, Henry. B. Blackwell, Mary Grew, James B. Bradwell, Celia Burleigh, Rowland Connor, Mary F. Davis, Stephen S. Foster, T. W. Higginson, Oliver Johnson, Moses Colt Tyler, Aaron M. Powell, Wm. Henry Channing, Miriam M. Cole, James Freeman Clarke, Rebecca V. Longley, John Whitehead, Hannah M. Tracy Cutler, Oscar Clute, Ada C. Bowles, Giles B. Stebbins, Elizabeth K. Churchill, Gilbert Haven. Other distinguished speakers are expected and will be announced hereafter.The friends of the cause in every State and Territory are respectfully invited to attend.By order of the Executive Committee, December 23d, 1869.HENRY WARD-BEECHER, President.MYRA BRADWELL, Corresponding Secretary.LUCY STONE, Chairman Executive Committee.THE STAKE IN VERMONTALL eyes are turned to Vermont. A Woman Suffrage campaign, the most earnest and practically important yet prosecuted in our country for women's enfranchisement, has been in progress there since last Autumn. In a few weeks the voters throughout the State are to vote directly upon the pending proposition to so amend the Constitution as to enfranchise women upon equal terms with men. Thanks to the American Woman Suffrage Association, -- whose tireless, capable representatives have traversed the State, leaving scarcely a hamlet in all that mountain land unvisited, -- its people will not vote wholly uninformed or misunderstandingly. Conventions, lectures, the distribution of tracts and other publications, have been the order of the day there for months; yet indefatigable as have been those exertions, and marvellous as the progress of the cause has been of late, we scarcely dare hope that victory will crown the efforts of the friends of Woman Suffrage in this first grand struggle for the political equality of the sexes, in the Green Mountain State. The Lexington and Bunker Hill conflicts have been re-enacted, in the victories won upon our western frontier; but the sterner battles of the war, the modern Brandywine and Stillwater, are yet to be fought on the plains of the populous States of the East. Much more means the ballot for woman in an old State like Vermont than in a virgin Territory like Wyoming, chaplet crowned, holding out its young arm, welcoming alike to its political privileges, Man and Woman. But of the States east of the Mississippi, we know of no one within
whose limits reside a people more sterling, generous, open to conviction in all that partakes of the liberal, than green-hilled Vermont. In that State, where conservatism is the exception -- where want of education is almost the only taunt ever flung at a citizen -- we may, in this first assay, be defeated; but our demand, founded upon Justice and Equity, will in the end force itself upon the conviction of its sons and daughters, the latter of whom are already rapidly becoming alive to the importance of the issue presented. We have watched the progress of this campaign with interest; we shall await the result with so-

licitude. May the "star that never sets" shoot to the zenith, and in the galaxy of States shed, upon elevated humanity, an undying luster!THE WOMAN'S MEDICAL COLLEGE OF PHILADELPHIATHE Woman's Medical College of Philadelphia, now more than twenty years old, with a record honorable beyond that of most American universities, and numbering some of thee most skilled and successful practitioners of the day among its alumni, held its Eighteenth Annual Commencement on Saturday, the 12th ult. Musical Fund Hall of that city was filled with a sympathetic audience, composed of the liberal citizens of Philadelphia and vicinity. Fourteen young ladies graduated, coming from all parts of the Union. It is impossible to estimate the good flowing oat from such a time-honored seat of learning, carrying thus yearly its healing skill, its liberality of thought and breadth of mind, moulding and shaping opinion, into all parts of the land. ANN PRESTON, M. D., Professor of Physiology and Hygiene, a woman known to letters and identified with Pennsylvania medical history, delivered the valedictory address. Space forbids the presentation of Dr. PRESTON'S valuable remarks entire; an extract or two must indicate their choiceness of character. Referring to what medical science has already accomplished, or is yet to achieve in its progress, she says:"Medicine is surely destined to become a richer blessing to humanity than it has yet been. The advances already made are prophecies of greater ones to come. If some widely-destructive diseases, as scurvy and small-pox, are almost vanished from the civilized world; if epidemics are held in check, and the percentage of recoveries in ordinary diseases is greatly increased; if, with advanced knowledge of hygiene, the average duration of human life becomes greater from decade to decade; still there is a vast amount of preventable disease and death, for which no effective remedy, as yet, has been systematically adopted. But physiology is now giving light and life to practical medicine. Therapeutics, at last, is widening into a science, as it begins to be recognized that all surrounding influences, air, sun, light, food, sleep, clothing, exercise and mental stimuli are within its legitimate domain as truly as Iron, Opium Bitters and Bromides. Nor do its boundaries stop here. Morals also belong to Therapeutics. Temperance,

Purity, Faith, Hope and Charity modify bodily processes; they ward off disease and prolong life, and the physician who does not realize this truth, and understand something of the reactions of the moral, intellectual and physical life, does not possess the key to the best success in practice -- is not yet initiated into the sacred mysteries of the divine art of healing."Speaking of the nervous maladies that have so generally fastened themselves on enfeebled womanhood, especially in so-called fashionable society, she forcibly remarks:"You know that quiet, interesting, imperative work -- work for hands and for mind -- is essential to their health; and as you sigh over their perverted, suffering, unsatisfied lives, yon cannot be content with the mockery of merely prescribing drugs, needful and beneficent as these may often be. Some morbid Michelets may speak of this feeble womanhood as the necessary result of advanced civilization, but it is very clear to us that it is not a high civilization, but the failure to reach it, to which this is due. The highest civilization will surely be in harmony with nature, with health, with the moral and Divine law. It will drive out follies as well as fevers; it will foster pure, quiet, simple tasks; and it will find its model of beauty in form and drapery; not in the vulgar devices by which fashionable mantua-making distorts and burlesques human proportions, but in the grace and freedom of artistic nature, and the corresponding fitness of clothing. The woman of a true civilization will regard as pitiful and barbarous the idea that uselessness is elegance, or that disease and languor are womanly, and she will surely escape the emptiness and dissatisfaction which oppress every human being -- the proudest queen of fashion as well as the lowliest daughter of poverty -- who does not cultivate and direct to ennobling uses the powers and faculties which are the glorious birthright of humanity."Referring to the progress of medical education abroad, she thus speaks:"The progress which our cause is making throughout the world is truly marvellous. In Free Switzerland, the Medical University of Zurich has for years admitted women to all its advantages; the great university of cosmopolitan Paris has now dispensed to them the fullest privileges and highest honors; the University of Edinburgh has opened its doors, creaking with the rime of ages, wide enough for their entrance; the University of Stockholm, in Sweden, we understand, is offering them facilities for medical education, and the Swedish government, it is stated, is about to establish a complete Medical College, at Gothenburg, for women exclusively. In Austria, the candidates for the degree of Doctor

of Obstetrics consist of both men and women; while in our own country not only the great University of Michigan, but a number of smaller Institutions also, have removed the barriers which forbade, them to enter."A BENIGHTED JOURNALISTIT is with pain that we observe in the columns that old established favorite and, in many respects, excellent journal, the Saturday Evening Post,of Philadelphia, an editorial upon, "Woman's Rights," in which certain views are advanced as the serious convictions of the writer, more worthy of the Dark Ages than the enlightened spirit of the Nineteenth Century. For Mr. Peterson, in days past we have entertained more than an ordinary respect. Scholarly, imaginative, always graceful and sparkling in editorial utterance, liberal upon most subjects beyond brother journalists, it has been almost with amazement that we have perused his narrow, illogical argument against "Woman's Rights," as represented by its many conscientious, earnest advocates. Not with any hope of wooing Mr. Peterson from the error of his position by thus holding up the mirror before him, but to show our readers how great is yet the necessity for labor and conversion, when reputable journals like the Post, penetrating into thousands of homes, can unquestioned enunciate such sentiments, we reproduce a portion of his article:"Some say flippantly, if Nature has appointed woman's sphere, why need any one else interfere in the matter; Nature certainly will enforce her own laws. But they forget that the disgust felt and expressed by man when he sees woman abandoning her rightful sphere, is one of the most potent means used by Nature to enforce her laws. Nature has implanted in the breast of man a true perception of what is proper and becoming in a woman; and it is Nature's voice which utters itself in the language of sarcasm, contempt and censure. So far from holding that those who now call themselves the peculiar advocates of woman, are her friends, we believe them to be really her greatest enemies. And that in proportion as they succeed in their design of giving women the elective franchise, introducing them into jury boxes, etc., they will injure the character, standing and influence of the sex. How it shocks us, when we travel abroad, to see women engaged in sweeping the streets, acting as porters, digging canals, and doing the dirtiest work on the farms. That feeling in us, which is Nature's

voice, says all this is wrong. But if these new notions of equality be true, then all this is right -- women should claim no exemption on account of sex from the lowest and most laborious work. And if the old barriers be removed, and the old feeling of chivalry broken down, and woman be considered simply as a female man, -- worthy of no special favors as a woman, and subject to no corresponding limitations - this is what it must all end in. Entitled to nothing but what she can command by her own force, in the rude competition of politics and of business, she as the weaker vessel will be pushed more and more aside." THE FIRST WOMEN JURORS.DURING the month which has just closed, upon our western verge of civilization, an event occurred which signalizes the rapid progress which has been made in reform, and strikingly marks the advent of the New Era for Woman. On March 7th, 1870, at Fort Laramie, Washington Territory, the first panel of women Grand Jurors our country has known was duly sworn. Strange as it may appear to the readers and believers of the philosophy Of the Tribune, not one of the number asked to be excused. Every one thus called to a novel duty, whatever may have been the sacrifice, unhesitatingly accepted the responsibility. An able address was delivered by Chief-Justice DOWE, which, for its liberality and realization of the needs of the hour, is eminently worthy of the widest publicity. Mr DOWE thus spoke:Ladies,and Gentlemen of the Grand Jury:It is an innovation, and a great novelty, to see, as we do to-day, ladies summoned to serve as jurors. The extension of political rights and franchise to women is a subject that is agitating the whole country. I have never taken an active part in those discussions, but I have long seen that woman was a victim to the vices, crimes and immoralities of man, with no power to protect and defend herself from these evils. I have long felt that such powers should be conferred upon women and it has fallen to our lot here to act as pioneers in the movement and to test the question. The eyes of the whole world are today fixed upon this jury of Albany County. There is not the slightest impropriety in any lady occupying this position, and I wish to assure you that the fullest protection of the Court shall be accorded to you. It would be a most shameful scandal that in our temple of justice and in our Courts of law any

thing should be permitted which the most sensitive lady might not hear with
propriety and witness. And here let me add, it will be a sorry day for any man who shall so far forget the courtesy due and paid by every American gentleman
to every American lady, as to even by word or act endeavor to deter you from the exercise of those rights with which the law has invested you. I will conclude with a remark that this is a question for you to decide for yourself. No man has any right to interfere. It seems to be eminently proper for women to sit upon Grand Juries, which will give them the best opportunities to aid in suppressing, the dens of infamy which curse the country. I shall be glad of your assistance in the accomplishment of this object. I do not make these remarks from distrust of any of the gentlemen. On the contrary, I am exceedingly pleased and gratified with the indications of intelligence, love of law and good order, and gentlemanly deportment, which I see manifested here. I will now listen to any reasons which any jurors may make for being excused. THE ADVOCATE.As an index of the continued favor in which THE ADVOCATE is held by the press, we select the following from numerous notices received:The (Philadelphia) North American of the 8th ult., in an appreciative notice of the March number, thus speaks:"THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE -- New York: William P. Tomlinson -- continues Antoinette Brown Blackwell's story; and contains a paper by Frances D. Gage on woman suffrage; another by H. H. Bond on the legal status of woman, and still others on the various phases of female life and opportunity. The magazine supports a full equality of rights of all kinds for woman, and is the ablest exponent of advanced views in this direction that we know of."The (Texas) National Index, thus speaks:"THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE for January, is on our table -- and very neat, unpretending, dignified and excellent it is. It is refreshing to read after people who can keep their temper and their good manners in the midst of argument, and can exert themselves nobly to overthrow a false idea without calling their antagonists names. There are plenty of brains, but no rant nor 'spread eagle' rhetoric in THE ADVOCATE."The (N.Y.) Evening Mail says:"As the title indicates, THE ADVOCATE is wholly in the interest of women, and among its contributors we notice the names of persons whose sayings and

writings have for a long time been the subject of public comment. The work is another illustration of the persistent zeal with which the advocates of woman's rights and privileges bring forward to the cause. The publisher is William P.
Tomlinson, 39 Nassau street, New York."The Central Illinoian says:"THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE. -- Another number brings with it dissertations of what are fast becoming the practical themes of the day. 'The Market Woman,' is a subject that is well handled in this number, as also that of 'Co-Education,' and 'Justice versus Expediency.' Published at 39 Nassau Street, New York."OUR fine serial, "The Market Woman," from the pen of our esteemed contributor, Mrs. Antoinette B. Blackwell, which has been an attractive feature of THE ADVOCATE since November last, has received many warm commendations from the press and gratifying expressions of interest from our correspondents, attesting the thorough appreciation of the public. One of the latest of these communications, from a young lady herself a welcome contributor to our pages, so happily expresses the general tenor of interest conveyed, albeit gently critical, that we present it entire:"I sympathized at first with the brave little Market Woman, but, somehow, as the story grows, there grows in my mind, with all my interest, a feeling of disappointment. Why must she, as the necessity for exertion so measurably passes away, become so mercenary? It is only the old chase after the 'Almighty Dollar.' What a pleasant, even luxurious home she might have made of that old homestead, instead of it being merely a place to toil and strive to accumulate riches. But Mrs. Reband goes on, feeding her family on dry Johnny Cake, no sugar, no butter, -- nothing but vegetables and that everlasting Johnny Cake, -- all through the story; until a couple of gossips -- despicable creatures at best - come in: and, presto, although it is an uninvited visit from people who are nothing to her, her table is loaded with delicacies that would have kept her own family in small doses, at least, of palatable victuals for some time. I do not see why hospitality should be thus far stretched, to gratify the curiosity of such inveterate gossips. Why could she not in a firm, yet quiet and lady-like manner have excused herself from entertaining such unwarranted visitors? The gossips might have raved, but their predetermined plan to pry into her home affairs would have failed. But these little points of criticism aside, -- which are really immaterial, -- Mrs. Blackwell is entitled to our thanks for giving us, in this age of sensational romance, a good, common sense story."THE readers of THE ADVOCATE who may remember our outline, in the November number, of the plan of Miss EMMA MARWEDEL, a highly intelligent German woman, for the establishment of a "Horticultural School for Girls," will be pleased to learn that Miss MARWEDEL, -- who was unable to perfect the then pending arrangement for locating in the vicinity and under the auspices of Cornell University, -- has definitely arranged for the establishment of her School at Brentwood, Long Island, upon a beautiful property especially purchased for her use by Mr. GEORGE ELLERY, the well-known President of the Franklin Telegraph Company, 130 Broadway. Miss MARWEDEL, by her sterling qualities of head and heart, and the unconquerable enthusiasm manifested in her enterprise, brief as has been her sojourn in our midst, has already won hosts of warm friends; and her School, now on the eve of successful accomplishment, cannot fall of largely filling a need which the establishment of such institutions, promising so much in the way of improved physical health and better compensation for the skilled labor of women, can only supply.COPIES Of Volumes I. and II. of THE ADVOCATE, neatly bound, will be furnished, postage paid, for ONE DOLLAR AND TWENTY-FIVE CENTS per Volume, by addressing the Publisher.CANVASSERS for THE ADVOCATE are desired in all parts of the country. Those thoroughly responsible can make very desirable arrangements by addressing the Publisher.CLUB RATES. -- IMP0RTANT REDUCTI0N.THE ADVOCATE hereafter will be furnished at $1.50 per year, single copy, and sent to addresses as desired, in Clubs of four or more, upon the following terms:Four subscriptions, . . . . $5.00 Ten       do 	  . . . . 10.00 Twenty    "	        . . . . 16.00We will hereafter send The Nat. Anti-Slavery Standard ($3.00 a year) and THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATE, each one year to old or new subscribers, the two for $3.50; --The Woman's Journal ($3.00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $3.50;The Radical ($4.00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $5.00;The Herald of Health ($2. 00 a year) and THE ADVOCATE, the two for $3.00.Advertising DepartmentBLACKWELL AND CO.
92 WARREN STREET, TRENTON, N.J.Dealers in and Agents forTHE LATEST AND MOST IMPROVED MACHINERY
For the Farm and Garden.
MANUFACTURERS AND INVENTORSare solicited to send us their circulars and terms, as, being centrally located in one of the most productive farming districts, and having amongst our customers the most enterprising farmers, we are prepared to give first-class implements a favorable introduction.Address   BLACKWELL & CO.,
Agricultural and Seed Warehouse,
92 Warren street, Trention, N.J.N.B. - Please state where you saw this advertisementAYER'S HAIR VIGOR,For restoring Gray Hair to its natural Vitality and Color.A dressing which is at once agreeable, healthy, and effectual for preserving the hair. Faded or gray hair is soon restored to its original color with the gloss and freshness of youth. Thin hair in thickened, falling hair checked, and baldness often, though not always, cured by its use. Nothing can restore the hair where the follicles are destroyed, or the glands atrophied and decayed. But such as remain can be saved for usefulness by this application. Instead of fouling the hair with a pasty sediment, it will keep it clean and vigorous. Its occasional use will prevent the hair from turning gray or falling off, and consequently prevent baldness. Free from those deleterious substances which make some preparations dangerous and injurious to the hair, the Vigor can only benefit but not harm it. If wanted merely for aHAIR DRESSING,
nothing else can be found so desirable. Containing neither oil nor dye, it does not soil white cambric, and yet lasts long on the hair, giving it a rich glossy lustre and a grateful perfume.PREPARED BY DR. J. C. AYER & CO.,Practical and Analytical Chemists,
LOWELL, MASS.
PRICE $1.00.TO. THE SICK. -- A CURE.
Established Twenty-four Consecutive Years.Acute and Chronic Diseases treated without Medicines, and permanently cured.Phebe A. Ferguson Dusenbery, Caler C. Dusenbury, Magnetic-Movement and Water-cure Physicians. No. 29 West Ninth street, between Fifth and Sixth avenues, New York City.THE WOMAN'S ADVOCATENO. V. May, 1870. VOL. III.THE MARKET WOMAN.Antoinette Brown Blackwell(Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1869, by ANTOINETTE BROWN BLACKWELL, in the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Southern District of New York.]CHAPTER XII. WESTWARD, HO!IN another month, Mrs. Reband and her one medium-sized, well filled trunk were stowed away on shipboard, en-route for Oregon via Aspinwall, Panama, and San Francisco. There were other passengers, including several ladies.The market woman moved in the midst of the others like any sensible, experienced lady of positive character, having business of her own which she was lawfully pursuing, and concerning which it was not necessary to bore her neighbors or to ask advice."Who is that quiet, rather oldish lady, and where is she going?" asked one young gentleman of another."Don't know; but I'll go up and do a little polite pumping. I'll rather play 
the filial, you know; and get her history. One needs some occupation on shipboard."He walked leisurely up to Mrs. Reband's side with a few good day and fair weather preliminaries; which she, who had sat long enough looking idly off upon the water, accepted graciously."I suppose, madam, you are going out to join your husband or son.""No, I am going to prospect for gold.""Indeed! What, in California?""I am bound for Oregon. It may be gold is to be found there quite as abundantly as in any other part of the world.""Is it possible!" he exclaimed, looking a little mystified and uncertain. He was just on the point of adding: "How odd for a woman to start off gold hunting;" but he only said, "I didn't know that gold had ever been found there. It's almost a wilderness, isn't it?"The puzzled look came once more into his face, and he glanced at his companion as if a suspicion of her sanity had crossed his mind; but her placid, assuring smile made him add hastily, "I'm going to the mining regions too, but in California.""Well, success to you; but you know there are several ways of searching for gold.""Yes, I know; but I hope I shall light upon a nugget half a foot through. Why shouldn't I?""I hope you may," said Mrs. Reband, warmly, "but if you do not it is of little use to be disappointed. A delicious fruit country where vegetables can be grown, at almost all seasons of the year will yield a handsome living to any persevering young man who is ready to try, and try again.""I'm ready for that; but I take to gold more than to fruit raising. I should
not mind fasting outright for a year or two if I could thrive on it and make a
fortune.""Making haste to be rich is a native California fever and very contagious, I understand. Possibly you are predisposed to it already, Mr. Ainslee.""Possibly, madam; but you see there's the girl I left behind me, and I must earn her a handsome home.""If you earn it you will have it; but if you get her a plain home she can come on and help you earn the handsome one.""Oh, my wife shan't work -- that I'm determined.""It is very generous in you; but you must tell me about her. Is she an
invalid?""She? oh no! and once more the youth, just fresh from Cambridge,(undergraduate) opened his eyes in perplexity; but reading only
the bland motherly interest on a pleasant, elderly woman's face, he said, "she is only a school-girl, and the petted child of a rich father. So I am bound to be ready for her, you know." Then finding the motherly interest deepen under this burst of unexpected confidence, he fell back into a glowing description of his lady-love, quite to their mutual satisfaction; and the two parted friends. It was not until he had rejoined his companion that be began to be conscious that all the pumping

had not been done by himself. Yet on the whole, it had been so amiably done, he was not disposed to resent it."My dear Mrs. Reband, you have not told me what it is that takes you out here alone with your family," said a lady as they stood together talking in friendly fellowship, one evening."I have always wanted to look at that Southern Cross as I see it now," was the reply. "It will be a life-long pleasant memory to me.""So it will to me, I must say; that and I'll find husband and point it out to him."There the matter dropped. To "sink the shop may be difficult enough for a masculine mind; but feminine diplomacy never attempts it. It may be really uppermost in all a woman says and does and yet nobody ever dreams of it. Mrs. Reband would have scorned to disown her calling as a market woman to her fellow voyagers, yet no one of them had the slightest suspicion of the character of her thirty years' steady occupation. She had simply laid aside her pink sunbonnet and everything which it represented, and at present she was only a genuine, interested, wholly unassuming traveler. Having no part to play she played none; but was merely true to herself, her instincts, and her experience. She had a great interest in the whole Pacific Coast, and here was the common ground upon which every one met her in ready converse. A common interest is "one touch of nature" which "makes the whole world kin." Quick to catch every incidental suggestion and to ask appropriate questions whenever there was the probability of an intelligent answer, she was regarded as an entirely harmless but rather entertaining and peculiar person. Thus with eyes, ears, and tongue under admirable command, friendly, and accepted by every one she met, the market woman journeyed on, till, leaving the waters of the Pacific Ocean, she entered the gaping, wide-mouthed Columbia river.But no sooner had the Golden Gate been fairly left behind and a new set of passengers on board, all en route for Northern latitudes, than Mrs. Reband had realized at once that she was in the midst of possible future neighbors. She was a representative of those at home who had sent her on a special embassy, and something of the nature of her business as a traveler began to be very naturally understood amongst her fellow voyagers. She was no longer merely a lady traveler; but a business agent - an enterprising woman with a shrewd, practical head on her shoulders and an undisputed claim to look into everything which might concern her in the matter which she had in hand. Still self-controlled and quiet, yet whoever was practically posted as to the resources of the new country which she was going to visit, found her always a good and defer-

ential listener; and she occasionally entered into close business discussions with grey-headed settlers, and into estimates and calculations with the two or three traders and speculators who chanced to be on board."I tell you she's a buster;" said one old fellow, who had been talking to her for half an hour about cattle raising, beef, dairies, and dairy farms; and who felt it incumbent on him to express some downright approval of her astonishing good sense. "They talk about woman's rights now-a-days; -but she's usin' just the kind of rights I believe in. One does like to meet a woman once in a while who knows something 'bout real things.""It's a fact!" said his companion. "I shouldn't wonder if she'd be a great
help to the country if she settles down -- mebbe give it jest such a lift as most nobody else could. The women is always so weak mostly for new country life. I hate to bring my wife out here terrible, 'cause she pities herself about it so dreadfully, you know; but I've been unlucky, and at present I don't see no better way through.""Well, it's hard for both of ye; but think of a woman coming and leaving
her husband behind.""Yes, that's pluck; and it's likely that she's the fittest one, on the whole."She cries him up tall, though, and says he couldn't well leave home; but I expect they all knew who was just the one to come."No one found the woman's practical knowledge contemptible, or her insight into the nature of the problem which she had come to solve at all in fault. Just as every tree makes its own place, proving its fitness and its right to be, even when growing up in the most unexpected and almost impossible places, so this woman impressed every one with her eminent fitness for the unusual work which she had undertaken.She was clad with a purpose, and wore her unshaken self-reliance with so entire a sense of the wisdom of her course, that no one else was tempted to call it in question. For the rest, her outward garments grew even more colorless and inconspicuous than before; and when the voyage ended, both she and the others well-nigh forgetting her sex they were ready to render her any feasible assistance, in her wish to explore the Territory with a possible view to plant a new colony of settlers in this wilderness, so rich in promise for the future, so literal and uncompromising in the present.CHAPTER XIII. PROSPECTING.Mrs. Reband soon established herself in one of those many easily extemporised public houses peculiar to a new locality. The frame had been brought out on ship-board, set up in a day and afterwards duplicated by a second, a veritable Siamese twin to itself; both of which were now swarming with adventurous human life. This hotel was headquarters also for sundry government officials.At her leisure, Mrs. Reband proceeded to make frequent excursions here and there in examination of the various facilities of the region which she had come so far to visit. Her company of gardeners and market men understood well enough that to pursue the old calling in a new Territory would be like putting old wine into new bottles; it would be much less easy to extemporise a great city which would buy their produce, than to furnish building materials, implements and other indispensable things for the convenience of new settlers destined to spread over a large area of country. They desired therefore water, both as motive power and as the medium of transit for their commodities when ready to be thrown upon the market. They proposed to establish saw-mills, factories, and grist mills; and while each family was to have its own separate establishment, and be measurably independent in its operations, yet there was to be a certain
amount of co-operation amongst them all. In a word, it was to be a colony of
neighbors, jointly bent upon developing the resources of a new country to their own and the general good; such at least was the ideal; was this then the region best adapted for its realization? How shall any one, except an eye-witness, describe those journeyings to and fro in the savage wilderness, those pedestrian and horseback pilgrimages into primeval forests, those jolting experiences in ox-carts, in one-horse stages, and in manifold nondescript conveyances; and those still more wondrous adventures in boats of heterogeneous sizes and uses. But haply all this would not be much, to our present purpose. A woman crowned with fifty years experience can journey to and fro throughout our most savage wilds like Una, with her hand always upon the lion's mane and no harm will ever come to her.I have known one young woman, then not many years over twenty, who travelled thousands of miles on mule back, sometimes with and again without any of her own sex as escort. This girl journeyed alone up and down the whole length and breadth of California, coming into all the miners' settlements like a

vision of self-forgetfulness to preach to them temperance and godliness; while even the red-eyed among those whose thirst for whiskey was yet greater than their hunger for gold, would listen to her with bated breath as to a voice in the wilderness speaking to them of better things. A miner told me that all the men held her in reverence, speaking of her always in the grateful subdued tones of respect, though she possessed no other eloquence than the earnestness of a good purpose; and her name, unlike that of her brilliant successor, Anna Dickinson, -- who found a moving palace and a civilized iron road at her service, -- had never been known to fame, so that it was only the most desolate way-places which received her with exceeding gladness.The mission of our market woman was wholly practical and material enough; yet with all its flavor of worldliness, it carried everywhere its own dignity and its divine right. The main fact exists, that there is a time and a place for everything; and prospecting with a view to settlement in a new country is quite within the province of any competent woman."I have travelled quite extensively," she wrote home to her friends; "but have not yet fixed upon any desirable location. I am perpetually balancing pros and cons; and find myself drifting more and more into indecision. The country abounds in many noble advantages to settlers, and my judgment may be at fault in not deciding at once as to the wisdom of a settlement here."To her husband, she wrote: "Woman-like am I a little homesick, and does that weigh in the balance against an immediate favorable decision? I think not. I miss you all sadly; but there is something so novel in this new experience that I am perpetually interested and refreshed. I will at least wait till I receive the opinion of yourself and others based upon the statements already made to you.""That woman's a curus person altogether," said her landlord confidentially to his crony. "She don't altogether jump at things quick-like, as some women do; but I tell you if she don't see through a millstone first thing, she just drills a hole right through and makes a kind of spy-glass of it. She's cornered me up short a dozen times; but she don't seem to know it herself, and she lets me off easy.""Yes, I've noticed she's wonderful soft spoken and kinder defers to people; but that's what I think a woman should.""So do I; but I tell you I guess she's one that goes her own way after all. She's been here a good deal now, off and on, and I haven't seen the first fellow that could humbug her into believing anything unreasonable; and half a dozen of 'em has tried it!""Do tell! I haint much used to that kind of women. I must get into a talk

with her some day. My wife never takes up an argument with me; and maybe it'll be something like studying a new kind of animal up here in the woods. I've got acquainted with a good many such in the last two years.""I bet you! You'll find she's as sharp as steel, and as close as a nut; but I
guess mebbe you wouldn't select her if you was going to pick out a second wife."I rather guess I shouldn't nuther; but I can't help but hope she'll decide to settle in the country. We want enterprise!""That's so! We must help it on all we can. I'm doing my best makin' reasonable charges and all. What I like her best of all for is that she knows how to mind her own business. You don't find her nosing into other folks' affairs; and going on with preachments if you don't carry yourself just square. Sometimes I can't really tell whether she sees things or not." This art of "minding her own business" was a perpetual and uneasy puzzle to the worthy Publicin, yet Mrs. Reband was neither blind nor deaf.In the intervals of her journeyings to and fro, and her frequent excursions into the interior, there were many days of leisure which would have hung wearily upon her hitherto always active hands, except that her thoughts found sufficient occupation, and her ears were always open to every thing which might possibly be heard to advantage.But "what is one doomed to hear for the sake of a pair of ears," even in the most Christian community! It could hardly be better here in this fringe of twisted civilization and barbarism, upon the outer edge of the Pacific slope. She could not fail to be reminded that from the earliest budding of our Anglo-Saxon civilization there are tares everywhere springing in the midst of the wheat. As a nation we have always thought it expedient to keep with the red men a red record, unmindful that they are bound to hold it up to us one day in the broad sunlight of universal condemnation. The weak are doomed to be wronged and defrauded by the strong, and their interests sacrificed on the slightest pretext suggested by the pleasure or the convenience of the unscrupulous, until men learn that the laws of moral action and reaction are mathematically equal, like the physical laws.Many a white settler outside the protection of humane public opinion is like a sheep, dumb in the hands of the official shearers. Through the fragile partition walls which separated her from general business and life of the house, the market woman became necessarily cognizant of much that was going on about her. One day she learned that a government official, who was bound either to remain at his post or to be represented there, was going higher North

to a two weeks' merry-making in another settlement. "Will he be wanted before his return?" she asked herself, "and, if so, what then?"The answer was given her in due time. On the third day after his departure, a settler from some twenty miles away came in to transact business with the absent official, in behalf both of himself and his neighbors. He was in the greatest haste to have his affairs settled at once that he might return without delay to his family.Mrs. Reband, poring over the stale items of a hardly legible, smoke-saturated newspaper, heard a strange voice saying in a high, earnest key, "Can't ye give me some idee as to about when he may be expected back?"The suppressed anxiety and disappointment in the questioner's voice would have enlisted the attention of a much busier person than herself. She listened intently."Can't tell! he may be here any hour or he may not come before to-morrow or  next day!" answered in an indifferent tone by an employee of the hotel."Is it certain he will be here as early as to-morrow? Shall I be sure to see him if I wait over to-morrow?""Not sure! Nothing is sure here. He might go astray on the way or get belated a day or two with such roads.""Well, then, if I go home, can't you appoint a time - say next week or week after - when I can come agin and find him here?""Can't do it! He's liable to be called away any time, on important business. Better stay, while you are here, till he comes back."The victim sighed, hummed, walked to and fro, and even said a few rough words to relieve his vexation."Sorry for you!" said the clerk, with an inward chuckle. It would be a good joke to tell in the time to come."Well, let me see the landlord. May-be he can help me?""You may see him, but he can't say any different from what I say.""Poor Annie!" said the man to himself. "She'll cry her eyes out, and wish she was back in York State a hundred times. She was homesick enough afore I started, but I 'spose the Bentleys will cheer her up all they kin. Can't be help, any way. Cost a heap of money too. Pshaw! too bad! -- Thunder! who'd a thought it! All this trouble just to git our deeds and things! to bad!"Too bad!" repeated Mrs. Reband, on the other side of the rickety boards,
and she was almost resolved to go in at once and tell him the truth.But prudence was the market woman's ruling characteristic. Life, and interests dearer than life, she had intrusted to a civilization outside of the pale of

law, and she must be equal to the emergency. Woman as she was, she must suffer everything and be silent - not from inhumanity, but because a woman capable of deciding to go alone in to such a region of darkness in quest of fortune, bearing with her the trusts of others, has first learned that the indispensable condition of success is thus closely to keep her own heart.Day after day passed, and the poor man lingered here still. He was a stout
young man of thirty, like herself with some Dutch blood in his veins, though
American-born and reared, and her heart went out to him like a mother's. His rosy face seemed growing peaked and wan with the suspense, and as he sat near her at table, usually silent, but now and then speaking plaintively of his family, and the troublesome delay, with all his innocent hopes and regrets; it required all her strength of character to seem unconscious of the wrong, under such exceeding provocation.She was silent, but at length she advised the man to hunt for work, telling the poor fellow that the time would hang less heavy on his hands if he had some thing to do. He might earn something to pay his way, and she would send him word the very first hour of the return of the office-holder for whom he waited. So he went to work with a somewhat lightened heart; for labor can buy food almost anywhere; and in due time, his business arranged, he left for home, still ignorant of the altogether unnecessary wrong which had been done him. How queerly people will look into each others faces one day when the curtains are all drawn aside!So the winter passed, and though many another incident of fraud and outrage often sent her blood up to fever heat, word, and look, and manner, were all as quiet and even-toned as though she had been dwelling in a state of veritable hybernation.Mrs. Reband had the good sense to discriminate between the social deficiencies of the country at present, and its future moneyed prospects, and constantly consulting with the friends at home, very carefully on her representations did they all balance the question to settle or not to settle in this region of transient privations and permanent success to the enterprising.But enterprise will thrive everywhere, and so they at last decided; believing
that the advantages were not sufficiently great to induce them to seek a residence here. So this Western episode in the history of our heroine proved to be only an episode. A vast and promising region of country bad been weighed in the balances of a market woman, and she had not found it all together wanting; but she discovered, as many wise men and women have before, that the ideal is often far more attractive than the reality. In her newspapers she had studied a

true picture of Oregon, but with the shadows thrown out. Besides the real sunshine there had an icy Northern tint.In later years Mrs. Reband's eye always brightened, and a new elasticity came into her whole being, like a fresh wild breath, floating up from the wilderness of those sharp-leaved, evergreen experiences, whenever they were recalled to her memory.CHAPTER XIV. CHANGES.THE opening of the Spring market season found Mrs. Reband again in her accustomed place, little changed in any outward token by her journeyings. She and her neighbors had decided to continue for the present in their accustomed pursuits."I knew it would cost quite some money to do them regions on the jumping off place, tother side," said one; "but to hear you tell over what you saw and how things were, makes me satisfied, for one, that I've got my money's worth. You go into it so in telling over things, Mrs. Reband, it kind a' makes a fellow's mouth water through, and most wish he had gone on there himself.""If some of us had gone, though, it would have taken a good deal larger pile I reckon;" said another. "There's smoking to do, and sometimes a little something warming needed after a hard jaunt. A woman manages to keep herself from getting chilled, with an extra shawl or so; and she buys them herself. I've been looking over the items and I've made up my mind it takes a woman to be economical, -- especially of other folks' money.""Yes, theres no charge for extras!" said another, with a satisfied, still smile. "Nobody expected to be treated at our expense, it appears to me."So with the universal vote of "satisfied," this incipient migration copartnership, like many other things before it, dissolved into thin air."I am, very glad you went, Susan, now that it is well over," said the husband privately; "just as one is always glad of a rather tough experience after
he has fairly done with it. 'All is well that ends well,' but if Australia or the Sahara Desert is to be investigated, hereafter, we must leave the young ones at home to look out for themselves; 'for whither thou goest, I will go.'""Yes, John," answered the wife. "The experience of one Winter apart is enough for either of us. It seems like getting home again at evening after an almost endless, tiresome day."To fall back again into old quiet ways after a long interruption is always refreshing! The whole house seemed brighter and pleasanter than ever before, and every plant put out of doors grew green and vigorous in unwonted beauty. The daughter, singing again at her piano, as she used to in the old days, awoke perhaps sweeter chords in the maternal heart than had ever vibrated there before; and the prattle of children was enjoyed by the grandmother as it had hardly been in earlier days by the more care-burden mother. Are there rest periods in almost every life, when everything around moves on of itself harmoniously and the soul gathers up a latent strength for the future?The months wore evenly on; but war clouds were brooding over the country, and the storm broke at length in awful wrath.Mrs. Reband's youngest son, like the child of many another mother, early enlisted as a volunteer in the defense of his country; and early was his young head laid low by the side of theirs in an ever honored grave. So the brightest
and best went out from half the households of the land, and many of them never came back again to us;. but I think there is a home somewhere under kindlier skies, where all these who willingly gave up father and mother and kindred may be gathered again -- a great household company of brothers, their robes made white and shining through the blood of self-sacrifice -- and that there they dwell together in the house of the Eternal Father.But a chill had a settled in the mother's heart. When the boundary of life's successes has been fixed for one's self; and he knows that he shall never cross
over it in person, on this earth, how all his own withered possibilities seem sometimes to be gathered up and fastened trustfully to the destiny of another who shall stand as his representative. So Mrs. Reband had garnered up all her own highest unrealized ambitions and had laid these upon the altar of her future in that beloved youngest child. Now they were swept off with him into that great unknown; and while the mother's heart was bleeding for her boy, her hopes, her aims, and many of the proudest consolations of her toiling life lay all about her in ruins. There is no grief more unutterable than this -- no wonder it
seemed hard for her to be comforted! In one's own life, with its personal effort, one accepted failure, though it may grow deeply into the very heart, with exceeding anguish, is not yet irremediable. Prostrate hopes may rally again to a new purpose; and this time, warned by the past, with all the powers of one's being concentrated upon success, the end be more than realized. But to live after the very end and consummation of life has passed away -- ah, that is fearful!"My daughter, I have a pain in your breast," said Madam De Stael. "My

son! my son! I have died in your death!" was the feeling of this mother who knew not how to be comforted.But all the Heaven above us is one reservoir of dew to cool and moisten the fevered soul, and there is always balm in the storehouse of God's eternal love for his children. She came one day upon a little grandson who was weeping bitterly, curled up there alone by himself at the side of the house, the sleeve of his little checked apron wet with stifled tears."What is it, dear," she asked, sitting down by him in the sunshine and gathering the poor little face, so pitiful in its early grief, tenderly into her grandmotherly arms, while her own eyes rained afresh at the memory of another whom she had often folded thus to her mother's heart."See, grandmother my little cart is all broken! Uncle Henry gave it to me, and you know he never can give me another one," said the boy, sobbing afresh.The grandmother sobbed too. She strained him to her breast till the child was pained and terrified. "You hurt me, grandmother," he said, gently; his eyes looking up to her pityingly, with his own grief absorbed in hers.She noted it all, and felt her deepest sorrow changing into new love and new hope for this grandson; and when she rose up again it was with a feeling almost like that of a mother whom her child comforteth. There was a new glow in her midnight horizon -- a new star of promise arising for her in the East; and now she remembered again all the others who still clung to her love.Again, she went daily to the market place, and when a customer came, served him promptly and willingly; but if no one was there to purchase, she sat poring over the morning papers to learn the last news from the seat of war; or the long, grey army sock grew rapidly under her busy fingers, though her grave, absorbed look often told you that her thoughts were far away. It was in this way that the whole nation read, and pondered, and toiled; few people meeting anywhere without exchanging thoughts upon the all absorbing topic. Yet everything went on as hitherto; and one attended to his farm, and another to his merchandise, throughout all the peaceful North. All the land was as sunny and the fields as deliciously green as ever; and if there were more tears and sadder faces, perhaps, also, smiles and irrepressible hopes oftener came uppermost. Our martyred President retailed unceasingly his fund of witty anecdotes, all through the war; making the people everywhere laugh with his humorous stories; but the undertone of pathos and tragedy were with him always. So he went up from the play-house to his last account, followed by the grateful reverence of every noble heart; for the people loved him and had rested in his integrity.But now, while war yet raged, and Southern fields were crimson with the 

blood of brothers, sickness came to the hearth-stone of the market woman, and death took from her a yet dearer treasure. The love and promise of a little child had been the silver lining to the black cloud of her first bereavement; but there could be no partaker of those innermost joys and sorrows, which the twain who were one had already shared together. A treasure house of sacred memories had belonged to them, and now to go in there alone, was the uttermost desolation.If her best hopes had failed with her son, all her noblest moral instincts and her very conscience itself seemed now to have suffered loss. There are few men  or women who have learned habitually to practice highest disinterestedness; and when this great lesson has been learned till it seems easy as breathing, cold and weary seems the life that is left after the gentle exemplar has been taken from it. The form of everything abides; but everything is automatic. The best warmth in the sunshine has been taken away - all the freshness in the vital air has been consumed; yet some must bear even this.When one has journeyed for over thirty years side by side with a help-mate whose arm was quick to save at every stumble, whose hand was ready to aid in every task, whose wisdom was able to counsel in every need; and whose love has been sun and shield in every emergency, he must either fall prostrate under the loss or gird himself anew to stand alone. It is a weakness to fall; it is the sudden snapping asunder of the bent bow; it is the fatal flaw which stands palpably revealed under the final test. It is a failure of character which is closely akin to moral guilt.After the first shock was over and she realized that the husband of her youth had gone forward without her, and would not come back to her, the market woman returned to her vocation, and still held steadily on with all her accustomed pursuits. All the sweet memories of the past were still bleeding at every pore, and it was no time now to relinquish an occupation needed to fill her time and employ her thoughts. She had her recompense. Every measure of vegetables which she gave to a customer, unraveled a little thread of the great web of anguish which enveloped her. Every seed planted in her garden drew under with it an infinitesimal "wave length" of her sorrow. She found in gathering the fruits of the earth, that, to ripen is to absorb sunshine; which ripples out to you responsively at the gentlest touch. Everything returns to you as much as you give it but not the same in kind.So she fought womanfully with life's sorrows as in earlier days she had fought with its privations, taking little thought for herself. Those years of her own and her country's trial wore slowly away. If the ordeal was severe, the gold was the

brighter when it came out again from the furnace. The cruel, uncivil war was ended, and in all the land there were no slaves. Time, pouring its oil and wine of healing into the hearts of all mourners, of which the whole country was full, remembered also the widowed market woman. Children and grandchildren yet remained to comfort her. Nature, who every year renews the youth and beauty of her great family of vegetable nurselings, has yet higher and holier gifts for all spring.In the process of events, the office of the market woman was magnified in the eyes of many. Was she perpetually seeking a partnership; or was it only the partnerships that were perpetually seeking her? It is astonishing how many new enterprises yearn for the patronage of a rich widow! It must be the instinctive longing of the sucking child for its natural aliment -- the eager groping after the wanting feminine element in the out-of-doors, busy, masculine world."If a man leaves business," said a retired gentleman, "it is wonderful how in a few years reports of his almost fabulous riches spring up like evergreen cedars on a mountain clearing, and grow larger and larger every year. It is really uncomfortable. People build his air castles for him; and if anybody enjoys them, it certainly is not himself."On the contrary, a woman out of business is no novelty; but a woman in business, making money solely on her own responsibility -- that is a circumstance worth noting. Her riches are the ever gathering snow-ball. It is setting up a new type in the general order of things; and possibly may involve results worth cultivating. Coal mines, oil-wells, patented rights, new inventions, fledgeling speculations, and joint stock concerns without number, fluttered to the feet of the market woman like young partridges, many of them still carrying their shells on their heads.CHAPTER XV. WAITING.In the year 1869, a number of men and women were returning from a State gathering, which had drawn together people from every direction, through the influence of a common interest. At a little wayside depot, where change of cars was necessary, waited several women. One of them, wearing the "American costume" or short dress, was an Eclectic Medical Doctor, eager to battle with wrong in whatever form it happens to be manifest, and with all the zeal and intrepidity of Martin Luther. He that offendeth in one point is guilty of all, was

a fundamental tenet of her creed; not one jot or tittle of it was to be overlooked or atoned for in her intent or purpose till all should be fulfilled. There also was our market woman, waiting with the rest. She wore a respectable black velvet bonnet, black cloak and dress, and inexpensive dark furs; and was, as it appeared, a stranger to all others."Woman can never be emancipated from custom or take her proper place in the world till she wears a healthful and convenient dress," said the Doctor."Can she never take her proper place in the world till she has done away with all evil?" asked a lady at the other side of the depot."True! she can't take it till then. But why not begin at once with a reform which we all see to be so plainly needed?""Because there are so many other plainly needed reforms, taking precedence even of this!""I don't see it!""The old Romans wore their graceful inconvenient togas and sandals, which suited them on the whole well enough; but the Anglo-Saxons, who had work to do, found for themselves a more fitting style of clothing. No Yankee would tolerate a dressing gown outside his study or his easy chair. So when woman finds her way into all the best fields of labor, she will discover also the best ways of doing her work, conveniences of dress included. Her style of wardrobe hitherto has not been greatly unsuited to her general household vocations.""Except the corsets! said the market woman, quietly."Except the corsets!" repeated the lady, smiling and bowing across to her. "That is an important exception; but corsets might be worn with a short dress, if women were still silly or uninstructed, and vain of a graceful figure. Tight lacing may accompany any style of dress -- even a dandy's stuffed waistcoat.""That's so!" said the Doctor. "But you must keep to the point if you admit that women will sometime wear a more healthful style of dress, then why not begin at once? We ought to practice what we know, I think!""We ought to practice what we believe to be on the whole for all best and highest interests I think. A moral martyrdom may be worse than physical inconvenience! If one is crippled in influence or wounded in feeling every hour, because she adopts even the most sensible style of dress, perhaps she had better save her energies for more fundamental things to which dress is only the related outgrowth.""Nothing is more fundamental than the care we take of the house we live" said the plucky little partisan, positively."Nothing except the care we take of the real selves who live in these houses," answered the lady smiling.Well! yes! I admit that of course, but a doctor has chosen as her especial vocation the care of the body. It is particularly fitting, isn't it, that she should wear a reform dress and so practice her own teachings?"Her eyes turned to Mrs. Reband for an expression of opinion."I think that is consistent," replied the market woman. "She makes it her practical business, and is ready to carry it out in every point. I like that!""So do I. You may depend that nothing can be done till the reform dress is adopted. How can a woman work in a garden, in a draggling, long dress?""She must suffer some inconvenience from it, certainly!" said the market woman, with a peculiar but scarcely perceptible smile."She will never succeed as a gardener or a producer of any kind, never! She can't compete with man at all in that line, till her dress is equally convenient.""Do you think so? I have worked in the garden more or less with tolerable success for a great many years; but I have never worn a short dress. The mothers always say that the clean dirt is healthy; and one needn't be afraid of the washtub."But don't you know, then, if you have worked in a garden that a short dress would be an immense gain?"Yes, I have no doubt it would.""Then why not wear it?"I think I would wear it, or try it, at least, if I was twenty-five years younger now than I am; but if I had worn such a dress twenty-five years ago it would certainly have proved a failure, or I should have been a failure, which every you please; because the world was not ready for the experiment then. Perhaps adapting one's self a little to circumstances is one pretty good test of practical wisdom.""I should it a time-serving policy.""Would you? Well, people differ. I should be afraid that style of dress would hardly answer in most communities, even now. One might feel compelled to wear it only in the garden, and in that case it would perhaps take too much time to so frequently change the dress throughout, I think.""But why need you wish to wear it only in the garden?" persisted the practical little woman, heroically consistent to a fraction.A train of cars came rushing up to the side of the depot at the instant."Excuse me! My car is here. I'll answer your question when we meet

next, Doctor. Good morning!" and with a general, dignified bow to the other ladies, the market woman stepped into the car and was whirled on to her destination."Who is she? do you know?" was asked."I know about her," said a lady who had not spoken hitherto. "She is a widow, and she manages more than a hundred acres of land -- all of it worth at least a thousand dollars an acre, besides holding an enviable unknown quantity of greenbacks and government bonds; and they say she has earned the most of it herself, or at least largely through her own energy and management.""Good!" said the Doctor. "She is the most remarkable woman amongst us. I thought so!""She is only a common market woman, though; and she has been selling her own vegetables for nearly forty years. My aunt lives in her neighborhood, and I have seen her often in the market, but she looked so different here I didn't know her till just as she went out.""Tell us something about her!" was urged by several voices."I'll tell you a story - one my cousin told to me. It is not new, for I heard it first nearly twenty years ago; but it is one of the many that keep in circulation among her not too hero-worshiping towns-people; for I must warn you that she is not exceedingly popular at home.""The best people seldom are!" said the Doctor, slipping in her protest edgewise; and calling up a general smile."A number of years ago, when her children were young, some one gave them each a pet lamb. The next year they had grown to be sheep and had to be sheared. They got them nicely washed, and had bought a new pair of sheep-shears. While Mrs. Reband was gone to the morning market, her husband got one of the sheep into the barn and began to snip. But he couldn't make the shears work, and the sheep wouldn't keep still, and altogether he had a wonderful time. He succeeded in getting the fleece off somehow at last; but in a generally forlorn and ragged state. He had managed to take one cut into the flesh of the sheep herself, and the sheep had managed to kick a piece of skin off the man's hand. so that they both left the field in a bleeding condition. Cousin Tom, coming from school at noon with the little Rebands, had heard of the expected sheep-shearing. When they came along the poor sheep was just turned out, a few odd tufts of wool sticking to her here and there, and a little red dribble had scattered a fine dash of crimson over one side; so, boy like, Tom stood by somewhere to see the fun, under cover I suppose; for it is understood that loiterers aren't generally wanted on these premises."Pretty soon Mrs. Reband came driving up in her market cart, and one of the children ran out crying 'Oh, mother! mother! father sheared my sheep, and it bit his hand.'"'Bit him, did it?' she answered, laughing; as Mr. Reband himself appeared in the barn door. 'Then it has turned out to be a wolf in sheep's clothing, I suppose!'"'Oh no, mother! It is my real lamb!'"'Is it, dear! Well John!' she said, turning to her husband."'I've done my best, Susan; but that sheep of Baby's belongs to a kind that certain has got a cloven hoof,' holding up his bleeding hand."When the poor sheep herself came on to the scene, and the market woman's eye fell on it, they all looked so comically that cousin Tom said he had to run like a lamplighter to keep from explosion. So he lost the rest! But Tom learned that in the afternoon Mrs. Reband sheared the other two sheep herself, and the boy said her fleeces came off 'tip-top.' The father's fleece they carded and spun themselves, and the mother braided the yarn and colored it in madder or blue dye, so that Tom said when it was knit it was clouded 'beautifully' and no other children wore stockings half as pretty as those made from the wool of Baby Reband's pet lamb."After that Mrs. Reband always sheared the sheep herself, as long as they kept sheep; and sometimes there were more than a dozen of them.""Capital! I like that!" said the Doctor, sipping at her under lip in excessive delight."It is a good story, at least," said another."Her sheep-shearing is a fact, at any rate! She told my aunt that herself. Possibly cousin Tom may be responsible for a little coloring to embellish it with.""What else can she do?""Anything, they say. If she was willing, like Barkis; and if she wasn't a little near, like him also, and would consent to invest her money in velvets and sables, her neighbors think that she could get an entrance into a Fifth Avenue palace almost any time. And they say she is rich enough, and clever enough, and enough of a lady when she chooses, to be a marked character and a leader even there. You have all seen her! She is much the same everywhere, I should judge. Change of dress may be a little puzzling at first; but she would have a personality of her own, whether in calico or in satin.""Better and better! I knew she was a character!" cried the triumphant Doctor."She turns out to be another strictly American product," said the doctor's

opponent on the dress question. "The Old World can produce fine women; but it could hardly manufacture exactly such a specimen, I think.""Yes," said the story-teller laughing. "She is indigenous to the American Nineteenth Century; as adapted to it as Indian corn was to Indian agriculture in the time of the savages."The rumbling up of another train on the instant broke up the conference.CONCLUSION.Mrs. Reband is still as punctual as the town clock, at her daily post in the market. A little excursion now and then, sometimes to an agricultural fair,-- where her woman's eye scrutinizes new agricultural implements with the practical zest of one personally interested and often a purchaser, -- or to some locality or gathering of special interest, seems to be recreation enough. Her work is her meat and drink; necessary to the health of both body and soul.With the instinct of self-protection, she is still keeping out intruders from her own personal domain; though they crowd about her on every side. Like many another, wedded to a life-long calling which has grown to be a second nature, she still pushes back the evil day which she knows is surely approaching, when she will feel bound to give it up. The old house where she went as a bride, to her is home still. No other can ever be like it. She has never lived upon the surface of things, and display, a besetting sin of the nation, is not one of her failings., Her nature is reticent and self-contained."We don't want strangers, with ways different from ours, overlooking us!" she once said to a friend. "I shan't sell to any one while we are still working the farm; but I think I have sold vegetables enough to know how to dispose of my land when the time comes. Then I shall make that a business!"It is even rumored that the market woman is getting especially interested in Ruskin, Downing, and Mitchell; and that her eyes become particularly sharp-sighted and luminous whenever she passes a country villa, or a green little park, or any bit of ornamental grounds. Success to her, whether she still fights out the battle of life on the old line to the end, or having already conquered success to the utmost in that department, she again sets out, like General Grant, on a new tack! They both get pushed into the new position by new conditions outside of their original intent; but we may hope they will both prove grandly equal to all new emergencies.Mrs. Reband's past is history; but I have no intention of playing Paul Pry to her future plans or visions, if she has any. We will await their development.TIRED.Mary E. SquiresONE cannot help sometimes thinking,Of the comfort and rest to lie'Neath the cool green grass of Summer,And the violets growing 'nigh.They are so sweet in the Summer!And I know they would gently creepOver the grave where their lover,Was lying in peace asleep.Tho' braver by far to battle;To stand through the din and the fray;To toil on the westward journey,Till the sunset closes our day --Tho' braver by far to struggleTill life's battle is fought and won;But I am so tired of struggling,And the battle has only begun.The heart and brain are so weary;And the tears that our girlhood knewHave blinded the eyes of the woman,And the skies are so seldom blue.And a thought of rest is so pleasant;And I know that the birds would comeTo sing o'er the grave where their loverWas lying so still and dumb.I want no marbled Inscription;But only to lie and rest,With Mother Earth's arms around me,And the violets over my breast.They are so sweet in the Summer!And I know they would gently creepO'er the grave where their own true loverWas lying in peace asleep.MARY E. SQUIRES.THE LEGAL STATUS OF WOMAN.THIRD PAPER.IN the legislation concerning Woman, which has so marked the legal history of our country, her status has been more directly and more rapidly advanced. The hesitating, negative way of considering the subject, so characteristic of former times, has given place to a firmer and more positive manner in its investigation and treatment. One of the reasons for this difference of procedure grows out of the entanglement of rules brought about by the old method of fiction and subterfuge, by which it was attempted to disguise the fact that any change was taking place. When, as time passes by, a change of this nature is seen in all its bearings, bound up as it is in a mass of complex and contradictory rules, there being no longer any question as to the fact of a complete alteration, it is natural for men to begin to conform to the situation thus forced upon them, and to attempt to reduce it to a more practical shape. And it will be seen that many of the legislative acts are of this nature. Another cause is found in the tide of agitation which has so swept over the country in the past few years. By this the question was made to become one no longer to be avoided or treated with ridicule, but one to be fairly and squarely met. So long as it had no candid hearing, its appearance was dark and forbidding, but no sooner was it subjected to earnest discussion, than it began to wear an entirely different aspect. The real position of woman had never been fully realized. It was needed only to let in the light of reason upon its long pent-up darkness, revealing the full weight of the legal chains with which Woman had so long been bound, in order to work a revolution in the public mind, which could but react upon the law. Her disabilities have therefore been removed with a rapidity startling to conservative minds. To them it either appears plain that "one of the greatest safeguards to a complete unity of sentiments, of hopes, of plans, and of labors, is utterly destroyed,"

or seems a matter of grave doubt "Whether the statute law has not, in its desire to protect the property of married women, carried the doctrine too far, and given to the wife too much individuality." The progress made by legislation, however, would seem not to have been "too far," but considerably short of far enough. It has been but a struggling onward in the old path, the struggle being favored by the circumstances accompanying a higher civilization.It will be instructive, at this point, to notice some of the general features of the legislative changes, as illustrating the course of progress, preserving to some extent the dates of these changes, as showing how closely they followed public agitation of the subject. The general tenor of the legislation in the various States is not essentially different, except in the degree of advancement; and that of one State, therefore, may be safely taken as illustrative of the whole. Reference here will be had particularly to the legislation of Massachusetts.Innovations have always been made first on behalf of the wife living alone. Courts had found this feature of the question a difficult one to deal with: and the harshness with which the strict and logical application of the old rules grated on the feelings of the people is pointedly shown in the words of that great and equitable judge, Chief-Justice Parker. After commenting on the results to the wife if not allowed to act for herself while living separate and apart from her husband, he says: "If the Common Law allows all this, and there is no relief except by application to a court of Equity, the Common law is indeed most impotent, and where there is no court of Equity, as there is not with us for this purpose, the system is most iniquitous." We naturally expect to find, then, early in the legislative history, acts relative to this feature; and such acts form an important link in the chain of progress.In three cases they provide that a married woman may act as if she were unmarried: first, when the husband absents himself from the State, leaving his wife -- which received attention as early as 1787, and was more fully considered in the revision of statutes in 1835; second, when a married woman comes into the State without her husband -- which was adopted in the revision of 1835, it being thought, "in such case to be an inconvenience to her, and a hardship to those who dealt with her," if she could not act for herself; and third, when the husband is confined in

prison -- which was brought out by the discussion in the committee to receive the Reviser's Report. In two of the above cases an application to the court and permission by it was required in order that the wife might thus act.These provisions, as laid down by the legislature and carried out by the courts, gave individuality to the married woman when living alone; and they were but an inauguration of still wider changes.The next legislation was directed towards enabling the wife to hold and manage property in her own right, without the intervention of third parties, and in so far to be distinct before the law from her husband; thus following out the wish to secure the wife in a support without total dependance on her husband. Of these provisions we may notice those --First, as to the holding of property. Acts of 1845, ch. 208, made it legal for a married woman to hold to her sole and separate use: 1st. Property which she owned at the time of her marriage, in accordance with the terms of any contract which the parties might then enter into, (and acts of 1858 included the husband's property as well as that of the wife); and 2d. Any property which might be given to her by any person, other than her husband. This, it will be seen, was a simplifying of the rules of a prior innovation, by making legal what was previously done under the equitable doctrine of trusts. There was a further extension of this principle of innovation, by acts of 1855, ch. 304, in favor of women "hereafter married." By these acts: 1st. All property owned by her at the time of her marriage, and the profits thereof; and 2d. Any property which she might acquire, either by descent, devise, or bequest, or the gift of any person -- except the husband, or in any business, labor or services, carried on on her sole and separate account, was made her separate, individual property, free from the control of her husband. Acts of 1857, ch. 249, go still further, and-provide that all property which any married woman owns as her separate property, and any acquired in the ways before mentioned, shall belong to her free from her husband and his debts. By the revision of 1858 the word "grant" was added to the terms expressing the manner in which she could acquire separate property, "thus putting," as the commissioners say, "conveyances to her on the same ground as devises, bequests and gifts."Second, as to her management and disposition of property. The revision of 1835 permitted a married woman to convey property held in her own right by a joint deed with her husband -- thus incorporating into statute law an usage which had sprung up as an outgrowth from the old fine and recovery, and which Mr. Reed, the first lawyer of his time, resolved into New England Common Law. Acts of 1842, ch.74, permitted a married woman to dispose of her property by will -- her husband giving his consent thereto in writing. The courts having construed this as not allowing her to will property to her husband, acts of 1850, ch. 200, did away with this restriction. Acts of 1845, ch. 208, gave her the same rights over her separate property as if she were unmarried -- adding the rather broad qualifying clause, that she should use it in no business, but only in the ways specified in the act, which were investments in certain leading securities. Acts of 1865, ch. 304, went further and removed the restriction as to business, but required her to obtain her husband's (or the court's) consent to certain most important transactions, as conveyances of real estate and corporation shares. Acts of 1862, ch. 198, regulate her business rights to a certain extent; and acts of 1863, ch. 165, take quite a step backward and prohibit her from entering into partnership with any person.The object of all this legislation is, as is well stated by Hoar J., (in Stewart v. Jenkins, 6 All. 301) "to protect the property of married women by removing it from the control of their husbands; relieving it from liability for their husband's debts; enabling them to hold and manage it without the intervention of trustees and securing to them the proceeds of their own industry, skill and capacity for business."It will be observed that this legislation allows married women to act only on the basis of a separate property, and confers no general power upon her to act as an individual. Her disabilities in this respect remain, and their removal comes latest among the innovations. There is a reluctance to yield, to this extent, to old-time customs and prejudices, though that yielding has begun. Thus, acts of 1869, ch. 409, allow a married woman to act as executrix, administratrix, guardian or trustee, as if she were sole, and the marriage of a single woman acting in those capacities will not extinguish her authority; and ch. 292 further provides that any married woman may contract for necessaries for herself and

family and sue and be sued thereon as if she were sole. And some
States have gone further than this, as, for example, Maine, in which
State, by acts of 1866, partied women may make any contract not unlawful in its nature.As these various changes bring married and single women more on a legal  status of equality, recognizing their private rights, the Woman receives an impetus which carries it forward into the domain of rights of a more public nature. For instance, acts of 1869, ch. 346 recognize the right of women to become members of any parish or religious society, and to have therein "all the rights and privileges of men." Public institutions are everywhere slowly opening their doors; and still further on is legislation tending towards the position where Wyoming led the way.In all this we see the legal status of Woman being constantly pruned of the disabilities clinging to it from its connection with the ancient power; and opposers of change are tremblingly asking, Is not that enough? Can we give to Woman more without endangering the domestic relations? But most emphatic is the answer that the end is not yet. Everything shows the status of Woman to be in a shifting and imperfect state, and to require something further. As the law now stands no one position is fairly taken. We speak of the wife's being allowed freely to hold property, but there is much room for the application of the remark of the Supreme Court of Alabama in a recent case, that "the separate property which a married woman is allowed to hold cannot be said to be her separate property in its broadest sense." So there is neither freedom n woman's acting for herself or in others acting for her. In the exceptional cases which are included in her legal sphere of separate action,
there is connected a protective policy which keeps her in a perpetual state of quasi guardianship. When she wishes to act, she must either get permission of the court or of her husband in most important transactions. And even the courts are not able to agree as to what cases come within her sphere, much less can the parties themselves know. So simple a matter as an ordinary promissory note, raises questions as to her rights which need the greatest legal acumen to settle, and then the settlement never seems satisfactory. As the effects of isolated changes work themselves out through all the details of the law, its imperfections

become realized to a painful extent. Old and new rules are so commingled that there seems to be no sound reason for anything. The wife's rights, as compared with those of the husband, over children; to property on death or divorce; of inheritance and the like, are such as to constantly work hardship, and yet they remain so. Remedies by and against her are such that they oftentimes scarcely deserve the name. In short, her legal rights and duties are becoming so unsettled, as to make it almost impossible to tell where they begin or where they end.The old order of things had at least the advantage of being thoroughly systematized. But legislation, in attempting to remedy the defects of that system, by acts resting on no particular principle, but occasional, fragmentary and partial, is bringing us to a condition of having no system at all. The difficulty of such acts is pointedly shown in the words of Davis, J., (in Brookings v. White, 49 Me. 485). He says: "A partial enfranchisement of the wife, while the common law relations between her and the husband remain unchanged, is an innovation that unsettles the past without settling the future. The status of the feme covert, instead of being fixed by such legislation, becomes a difficult question for the judiciary. It imposes the task of adjusting new rights to old and still existing disabilities." Such is the necessary result of the course which has been and is being followed. We might apply the words which Emerson uses with reference to "Domestic Life": "Certainly, if we begin by reforming particulars of our present state, correcting a few evils and letting the rest stand, we shall soon give up in despair." Something broader and deeper is needed; some principle which shall bind this chaotic mass into one harmonious whole. What ought that principle be? Perhaps we may venture a few suggestions as to the answer in a concluding paper.IN THE BEGINNING.Elizabeth A. KingsburyTHE question is sometimes asked: "Why is it that woman has ever been subject to man? What cause induced him to rule over her?"The reason is probably this. In the early ages of the world, the mind
was comparatively dormant, and physical force bore sway. Men and women, in the savage state, roamed through woods and over mountains in companies, in quest of food. Sometimes these companies would be separated for years. Then, having lost the memory of others besides themselves, a casual meeting of strange parties would occasion fear in the bosoms of these wild people. Wrangling and strife followed, and the men being stronger and more combative than the women, they fell upon and destroyed each other, possessing themselves of the spoils. This aroused their cupidity, and war became an art, in which each tried to excel the other.Then, becoming robbers, they built strongholds, from which they could see a weaker party from afar, and sallying out, slay him, and enrich themselves with his substance. This was the case in Europe in the Dark Ages; in the times of the Barons and their clans. It is still the state of things among the Tartar and Arab tribes. The will of the stronger is the only law; violence and crime the result.Woman was an important item in the list of spoils. Being endowed by Nature with the ability to create and rear living beings, she had little leisure and less inclination for war. She, the giver of life, was utterly opposed to war, the destroyer of life, and she shrank from it with her whole being. When her father and husband were cut down by a hostile band, she had not the same power or motion to resist. She knew that her death would not necessarily follow. The conqueror, charmed by her beauty, promised not only her life, but that of her children, and maternal love prevailing, she yielded without opposition. It soon became a matter of course, that whenever a victory occurred, the conqueror should spare the women and children as a part of the plunder. Then they naturally awaited the result, away from the field of battle.But women at length became very numerous, in comparison with their
conquerors, and it was necessary to contrive some means to keep them in subjection. They were forbidden, under pain of death, to touch any kind if weapon. Completely in the power of their masters, they were subject to a thousand restrictions and indignities. Some had their feet crippled; some were closely confined, or allowed to go out only with their faces covered; while they were compelled, not only to bear chil-

dren, but to perform all the manual labor, and execute the most menial services for their lords and husbands.Soon they became a source of great power for their masters. They reared sons, and he sent them to subdue his enemies and increase his possessions. They reared daughters, and he sold them to the highest bidder or gave them as presents to those whom he wished to favor or conciliate.And thus woman lived on and on through centuries of untold suffering, thrust back into the darkest corner to be found, every avenue by which the light might reach her carefully guarded, lest perchance she might presume to compare herself favorably with man, or see to learn a letter of the alphabet.And yet, and in the midst of all this degradation and misery, man must have been conscious of her fine moral nature, her delicate tastes and high spiritual aspirations. Else why should he have embodied Justice and Wisdom and Liberty and all the excellencies and graces of Humanity in the female form? Why has he ever had a Vishnu, an Isis and a Madonna to whom to bow down in adoration and love?Because the spiritual part of his being has recognized the divinity of hers, and thus rendered to it a touching and timely tribute. Because his inner nature has ever acknowledged woman to be his equal; a sacred and beautiful part of the race.Burns expresses this feeling, that like a thread of gold gleams in the dark and sombre woof of by-gone ages I, when he says: --His prentice hand he tried on man,
And then he made the lasses, O."Thus, through all the dismal past, God has never left woman without a living witness of her own nobility and inherent power. Thus man has been compelled to do homage to the divinity of her nature, even while she has been degraded by his selfishness and sensuality.ELIZABETH A. KINGSBURY.A.B. BlackwellWhen we become nobler as individuals we shall find better modes of co-working for mutual assistance; for the best good of one is the best good of all. Woman must become a broader and more rational worker; more self-forgetfully remembering the well-being of the whole community; while man must equally learn that charity begins with the necessary, unending, small details of home and its inmates; so shall their several talents interweave far more beautiful and perfect results than those which their separate efforts have yet achieved. -- Studies.A. B. Blackwell.THE INEVITABLE HOUR.Augusta Cooper BristolTo every woman's heart, there comes an hourOf dread necessity. A time of loss,And utter desolation. Greater loss,Than when we sit alone in silent rooms,Mute with the agony of empty arms,And the strong tension of the mother-heartDrawn heaven-ward. For the pall around us thenIs not all motionless, but often swaysTo the light-wavering of celestial wings;Till on some blessed day the curtain lifts,Looped by a cherub's finger.But this hourHolds not one gracious parting in the cloud,But in blank heaviness it settles downUpon the woman-soul. No ray of timePierces that heavy darkness. Only HeavenCan star its lonely midnight.This dread woeIs when a woman wakens from her dream --The highest, purest dream of life and time,And sees the rich web of her fancy dropSlowly but surely from the man she loves;Leaving in place of that dear perfectness,The skeleton of manhood, -- the grim ghostOf her ideal. If EternityHolds not full reparation for her loss,Then hope and faith are Life's inherent lies,And Love is not the synonym of God.AUGUSTA COOPER BRISTOL.EDITORIAL DEPARTMENT.THE ADVOCATE - IMPORTANT CHANGETHE present(May) number is the last that will be issued of THE WOMAN'S ADV0CATE. In lieu thereof its subscribers will receive for the unexpired time of their subscriptions THE STANDARD, a new Monthly, a successor of the long established, excellent weekly journal known as THE NATIONAL ANTI-SLAVERY STANDARD.In making the announcement of this important change, which will come as a surprise to many of the warm friends of THE ADVOCATE, we desire to say that in taking this step, as in our conduct of the magazine since its establishment, we have studied what we have conceived to be alike the best interests of the cause and the wishes of the devoted friends who all throughout, in unstinted measure, have lent THE ADVOCATE countenance and co-operation.Very different now is the phase worn by the cause of Woman's enfranchisement from what it was when, well-nigh a year and a half ago, we issued the first number of THE ADVOCATE. Then the number who cared to identify themselves with Woman Suffrage, -- with the agitation of the question by journals or conventions, -- were comparatively few. When, almost unaided, animated by a desire to serve the cause, we deliberated the problem of a journal which should seek to give expression to the best thought of Man and Woman concerning a question we deemed vital and for which the hour of discussion had arrived, with one exception (The Revolution, in this city) we were the pioneer*The Woman's Advocate (Dayton, Ohio) was established about the same period.journal. Conventions then were rare. In no State was there an organization. A few earnest spirits -- the early apostles of the cause -- rarely endowed and baptized to the work, were indefatigable in their exertions, but, as for long years, their most persuasive words were powerless to break the spell of indifference. But a marvellous change has occurred within that brief period. A revolution in public opinion has been witnessed which
 
                              
a century in an earlier period of the world's history might not have effected.
No longer is the ark of Woman's Liberty confided to a few. Her champions number thousands -- a Grand Army, comprising not only the Old Guard of veteran men and women, but countless new recruits, Representatives, Governors, Judges, women of letters and of fashion, the elite of the land. The press of the country is open to the consideration of the once despised question; the halls of legislation, State and National, resound with its discussion. Nor is it an abstract, theoretical question merely. It has fairly entered into politics. Wyoming, infant Territory of the West, where woman is a voter, sends greeting to Vermont, bidding one of the oldest States of the East come up to her level, meting out justice to all her citizens, irrespective of sex. Between the surf of the Atlantic and the eastern base of the Rocky Mountains there is scarcely a State in which there is not an organization for the agitation of the question of woman's enfranchisement or some measure pending before its petition- besieged Legislature.In all this we see abundant cause for congratulation. Our heart, in common with thousands, goes out in gratitude for the wondrous change which marks a New Era in our history -- an entire revolution in politics. For the time and means we have given, -- cheered at every step by the heart outpouring of the well-wishers of the cause, and the consciousness of the measure of good exerted, -- we have no regret.In making a disposition of THE ADVOCATE, we have borne in mind only the good of the cause, and what we have deemed would be most in consonance with the wishes of our constituency. THE STANDARD which, as a weekly journal, under the administration of its well-known editor, AARON M. POWELL, and the ringing, outspoken utterances of WENDELL PHILLIPS, aided by a host of talented contributors, has been a power in the land, doing more, probably, to mould public opinion and affect legislation than any other journal, in its new form as a monthly will lose none of its intrinsic merit or national significance. Relieved by the abolishment of slavery and the subsequent legislation from its specific work of watching over the interests of the colored people, THE STANDARD as an independent magazine, will entertain the great questions of the Abolishment of Caste, Equality of Woman, Temperance, Labor, etc., lending generous countenance to each. With

its old array of talent pledged to the new enterprise, with new contributors secured, THE STANDARD cannot fail to take a high position among American magazines and be abundantly satisfying, both by quality and increased quantity of matter, to the subscribers of THE ADVOCATE.Grateful beyond measure to known and unknown friends who have gone with us thus far in our undertaking - whose generous word and unswerving countenance has lightened oft our arduous labors, enabling us in the bonds of love to do what we have for a common cause, reluctantly, yet filled with the assurance that ours is to be no final separation, we say FAREWELL!NOTICE.IN connection with the announcement of the transfer of the list of THE ADVOCATE to THE STANDARD, we desire to say that, agreeably with an understanding with the publisher of that monthly, those of our subscribers who already receive THE STANDARD, will be credited in advance with their subscriptions to that monthly, or will be entitled, as they may prefer, to have the subscription for the unexpired time filled in the name of some friend, whose address may be forwarded to the office of THE STANDARD, 696 Broadway, on or before July 1st of the present year. As our subscribers, in addition to the May number of THE ADVOCATE, will also receive the initial number of THE STANDARD, it is hoped that the liberality of the arrangement with the superior excellence of the latter publication will create an interest which may lead to increased exertions to swell its subscription list.