An Expostulatory appeal to
the Professors of Christianity, Joyned in Community with 
Samuel Ansley.It having pleased the Lord (whose I am, and whom I serve) to call
me by his Grace, even in my tender Years; by which Grace he put me
upon early seekings after himself, that so I might know him the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, whom savingly to know is
Life Eternal. 
Many sore and weary steps hath my Anxious Soul troad in finding out
the Path that leadeth thereunto, that so I might come to a certain
knowledge of what God is, and how he ought to be Worshipped: and this
made me go about from one Watch-man of the Night to another, inquiring
after my Souls Beloved, to hear if they could tell me were his
dwelling was, and where he maketh his Flocks to lie down in Rest.But oh the uncertain sound which they gave! Some said Lo here, and
others said, Lo there is he whom thy Soul desireth: but alas! when I
went out to seek him there, I could neither see his Shape, nor hear
his Voice; then used I to retire into my Chamber to suplicate him in
secret, whose Presence I could not meet with in those Publick
Assemblies; But yet still I looked for that  
that at a distance (viz.) the Appearance of the Son of God, which was to have
been had nearer at hand: sometimes searching over the Records of
Scripture, if there I could have found him substantially, whom my Soul
greatly desired to see: Oh but there I found him not, although I daily
read the Reports which his Ancient Primitive Servants have left there
upon record, concerning how they witnessed him, by vertue of the
effectual working of his might Power in them; but what was this to me?
Whilst I knew him not myself Experimentally working down Sin and
Iniquity in me, and removing that that did let, and would let till it
was taken out of the way, that so his own Righteous Scepter might bear
rule over me.  And thus as I fought him sorrowing, in an acceptable
time was he pleased to appear unto me, (magnified be his Name forever)
and to cast up a living way for me; though much contrary to the way I
walked in formerly; yet by his good Spirit he so instructed me, that I
certainly know this to be the way that leadeth to Everlasting
Felicity: yet I must needs declare, 'tis a Cross Way to the Carnal
mind and stubborn will of the fallen Creature; where I now find that I
as well others stood by Nature. But now the Lord having pulled my Soul
as a Brand out of the Fire, and made me willing in the day of his
Power I can do no less then  speak to the praise of his Grace, whose
own Arm hath wrought Salvation in and for me thus far.  And now I
say, this was the Grace by which I was called, and by which I am in
measure saved; even that Grace of which the Apostle speaks,  Tit.
2.11, 12, 13, 14. The Grace of God that bringeth Salvation hath
appeared (mark) to all men, teaching us that denying Ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily in
this present World: looking for  that blessed Hope and glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us (mark) from all Iniquity, and
purifie unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.  And
now being taught by this Grace, which is the only Principle by which
every one may learn to know God savingly, which principle God hath
raised up in me to publish and declare to other,  
thers,
where they should look for the appearance of this saving Arm and Grace
of God, which alone can burst the Bands of Death and set the Soul at
Liberty.  And besides the disposition which this gracious Principle
hath wrought in me towards all my Fellow-creatures, that they might
partake with me, and with the Remnant whom the Lord hath called out of
the World; I say that all might partake with us of the rich Love of
God, with which my Soul is refreshed at this very time, that now I am
writing to you, I found the God of all grace, laying a more special
Injunction upon me to visit you particularly; to Proclaim his free
Grace and rich Mercy, which he is pleased yet to extend towards you:
And upon the twentieth day of the eight Moneth; this present Year,
1678. in Obedience to that God which made me, and formed my Spirit
within me, and by the motion of his good Spirit, did I in fear and
much trembling come with a Message form the King of Heaven unto you,
which was this, viz. To make Proclamation of his universal Love
towards you; that so all who had not willfully withstood the tenders
of his Mercy and out-slipt the Day of your Visitation (after which the
Lord will tary for none of you) ye all might come and be converted
from your iniquities, and he would receive you graciously, so that
none should need to fear their Eternal Predestination or Reprobation
to Everlasting Misery, as though God had fore-ordained some for
everlasting  Damnation; for God would have all men come to the
knowledge of the Truth and be saved, as faith the holy Apostle, 1
Tim. 2. 4. and (faith God) Look unto me all ye ends of the Earth, and
be ye saved, Isa 45.  22. Nor may any presume in hopes of Mercy) that
they are in the estate of Election, while they are in the unbelief and
disobedience unto the Spirit of Truth, which Convinces the world of
Sin and leads the Saints into all Truth. for so came the Word of the
Lord unto me, Go, invite them to the Feast of ingathering, that so
they may be allured to turn  in  unto me, and be gathered by me, in
this the Day of the Stretchings forth of the Arms of my Mercy, before
I come to sift the Nations with the Sieve of Vanity, when such as are
found Chaste shall  
be blown away with the Whirlwind of my
Wrath, and there shall be none to deliver you, Isa. 30. 18.  This
Word (in the fear and love of God, which he hath shed abroad in my
Heart by Jesus Christ abundantly) did I come at that time to Proclaim
unto you, with many more such like inviting Expressions, would you
have had Patience to hear me, I should by divine Assistance have
declared unto you, as I did to such tender-hearted Ones without your
doors, whose Ears the Lord inclined to Hearken unto me.  And now I
find it upon me to write a few words by way of Appeal to you, and to
expostulate the case a little with you: Whether or no you will all
justifie that Action of haling of me, (who came in the Name and Power
of the Lord (and my Sister who stood patiently by me) out from amongst
you. I confess I heard no publick Command for it given by any of you;
but it was not dome by a person unknown to you, but one in Office
amongst you; so that had he not had private Commission from some one
or more of you, for the former knowledge that he had of our blameless
deportment amongst you, I dare believe he would not have used us so
Uncharitably, without receiving Reproof from you: Why indeed should
he, since none of you can justly say that we gave any Interruption to
you? ye are all my witnesses I waited in silence whilst there was a
Voice heard amongst you, taking that opportnnity to open my Mouth unto
you, when your teacher was perusing such Petitions as used to divert
him from so suddain a falling on to Prayers amongst you: But however,
though that time was not so long as ordinary, but Prayers begun before
I could so much as name my Message to you, upon request made me to be
silent during Prayer time, and a promise of being heard afterwards, I
tarried till your Worship was ended, & then began my Mouth to open
unto you; but no sooner had I charged you with being out of the right
way, but you made good that charge immediately, by shewing that
persecuting Spirit, which infallibly marks out and deciphers the false
Church; who hath ever violently handled and hardly used the Members of
the true: and so it became my lot  
lot at that time to
bear a measure of Sufferings form you; but the Lord upheld me by the
right Hand of his Power, so that I feared not the wrath of the
Adversary, though one more especially shewed himself mightily inraged
against me.  Oh! where was your patient Mind, that you could not
hear what I had to say unto you, and have tried what Spirit I had been
of, that so, if in Error, by sound Argument you might have convinced
me.  Oh! where was your Christian Moderation that ought to be
shewed towards all, whereby you should have manifested the Lord to be
at hand.  Oh! where was your Lamb-like Meekness, by which you would
have instructed such as should have opposed you, had you been in the
Truth? But whilst you profess the Name of Christ (who is Truth it
self) your are found in the Spirit of Antichrist, otherwise you would
not have so roughly treated the Guiltless; nay, if we had been guilty,
we ought to have had a more fair Tryal and Examination before you, ere
such hasty Execution should have proceeded from you.  This
therefore briefly is written in the Spirit of Love, and sent to you,
that all sober inquirers may have a true Accompt of the Occasion of
our coming amongst you that day; And let none be offended that I take
not in their Teacher with them, so as to appeal to him as well as
them; for as the Lord knoweth, 'tis not in any Enmity I bear towards
him; but as I formerly have had an high Esteem of him so I still do
retain a kind of friendly Respect for him; but having privately
address'd myself unto him, whereby to render the Reason of my turning
from him; in answer to which (he himself knows) I received not so much
as one word to give me any Satisfaction, but had a hasty Put-by from
him, which may very well excuse me in not making a second Application
unto him.  However, my Soul desires the real Welfare of all men,
and have written this neither in Envy nor Ostentation, but in answer
to the Requirings of the Lord, before whom my Heart is broken at this
time; and now in much godly Compassion have I  
I a Remembrance of such as have sincere Desires amongst you, and I doubt
not but that the Lord in tender Mercy, and for his own Seed's sake,
that cryeth to him for Deliverance in and amongst you, will in due
time reach forth his powerful saving Arm unto such of you, whereby you
shall be gathered into a place of Safety, before his Overflowing
Scourge be made to pass over you.  Let this therefore be a
Provocation unto you speedily to turn into the secret of your own
Souls, to the Appearance of his Son Christ Jesus, who there speaks
from Heaven unto you, reproving you for your Sin and Iniquity, and
exciting of you to Holiness and Purity; who by his Heavenly Light in
your Consciences, if you give up to be led and guided by it will bring
such of you as are now even as Lost Sheep of the House of Israel home
to the Fold of Rest.  Which is the hearty Desire and earnest
Breathing of her who is known to may of you by the Name of 
ELIZABETH BATHURST And now having invited you to turn unto the Lord, both by Word and
Writing, I am clear concerning you at this time.  Unto 
Unto you, People unto whom this Message is sent, a few words doth lie
with weight upon my Spirit, to put you in remembrance of dayes past,
and that you may call to mind the Promises you did make to the Lord
when your Hearts were tendered before him, because of the Judgments
that then seem'd to awaken you; but so soon as the Hand of the Lord
turned back, and with-held from smiting, Oh! who then amongst you were
faithful to those Promises? so that my I not say, that neither the
Mercies nor Judgments of the Lord have so awakened you as to turn to
him by Unfeigned Repentance? for whose sake the Lord hath put in my
Heart to mind you, for the sake of your immortal Souls, that you may
be awakened to a speedy turning to the Lord, that you may not provoke
the Lord to with-hold his Spirit from striving with you.   Written
in Obedience to the Lord,  by your Friend  ANNE BATHURSTTHE END.