The Lady's Looking-Glass, To Dress 
Herself by: or The Art of CharmingTHE
Lady's Looking-Glass,
To
DRESS Herself by:
OR, THE
ART of Charming.How long, O charming Iris! shall I speak in vain of your adorable Beauty?
You have been just, and believe I love you with a Passion perfectly tender
and extream; and yet you will not allow your Charms to be infinite: You
must either accuse my Flames to be unreasonable, and that my Eyes and Heart
are false Judges of Wit and Beauty; or allow, that You are the most perfect
of your Sex. But instead of that, you always accuse of me Flattery, when I
speak of your infinite Merit; and when I refer you to your Glass, you tell
me, that flatters, as well as Damon; though one wou'd 
imagine, that
shou'd be a good Witness for the Truth of what I say, and undeceive you of
the Opinion of my Injustice. Look---- and confirm yourself, that nothing
can equal your Perfections. All the World says it, and you must doubt it no
longer. O Iris! Will you dispute against the Whole World?
But since you have so long distrusted your own Glass, I have here presented
you with one, which I know is very true; and having been made for you only,
can serve only you. All other Glasses present all Objects, but this
reflects only Iris; whenever you consult it, it will convince you; and tell
you, how much Right I have done you, when I told you, you were the fariest
Person that ever Nature made. When other Beauties look into it, it will
speak to all the fair Ones; but let 'em do what they will, 'twill say
nothing to their Advantage.Iris, to spare what you call flattery,Consult your Glass each Hour of the Day:'Twill tell you where your Charms and Beauties lie,And where your little wanton Graces play:Where Love does revel in your Face and Eyes;What Look invites your Slaves, and what denies.Where all the Loves adorn you with such Care,Where dress your Smiles, where arm your lovely Eyes;Where deck the flowing Tresses of your Hair:How cause your Snowy Breasts to fall and rise:How this severe Glance makes the Lover die;How that, more soft, gives Immortality.Where you shall see, what 'tis enslaves the Soul;Where e'ry Feature, e'ry Look combines:When the adorning Air, o're all the whole,To so much Wit, and so nice Vertue joyns.Where the Belle Taille and Motion still affordGraces to be eternally ador'd.But I will be silent now, and let your Glass speak.The Lady's Looking-GlassDamon, (O charming Iris!) has given me to you, that you may sometimes give
your self the Trouble, and me the Honour of Consulting me in the great and
weighty Affairs of Beauty: I am, my adorable Mistress! a faithful Glass;
and you ought to believe all I say to you.The Shape of Iris.I must begin with your Shape, and tell you, without flattery, 'tis the
finest in the World, and gives Love and Admiration to all that see you.
Pray observe how free and easie it is, without Constraint, Stiffness, or
Affectation; those mistaken Graces of the Fantastick, and the Formal; who
give themselves Pain to shew their Will to please; and whose Dressing makes
the greatest part of its Fineness, when they are more oblig'd to the
Taylor, than to Nature; who add, or diminish, as occasion serves, to form a
Grace, where heaven never gave it: And while they remain on this Wreck 
of Pride, they are eternally uneasie, without pleasing any Body. Iris, I
have seen a Woman of your Acquaintance, who, having a greater Opinion of
her own Person, than any Body else, has screw'd her Body into so fine a
Form (as she calls it) that she dares no more stir a Hand, lift up an Arm,
or turn her Head aside, than if, for the Sin of such a Disorder, she were
to be turn'd into a Pillar of Salt; the less stiff and fix'd Statue of the
two. Nay, she dares not speak or smile, lest she shou'd put her Face out of
that order she had set it in her Glass, when she last look'd on herself:
And is all over such a Lady Nice (excepting in her Conversation) that ever
made a ridiculous Figure. And there are many Ladies more, but too much
tainted with that nauseous Formality, that old-fashion'd Vice: But Iris,
the charming, the all-perfect Iris, has nothing in her whole Form, that is
not free, natural, and easie; and whose every Motion cannot please
extreamly. and which has not given Damon a thousand Rivals.Damon. the Young, the Am'rous, and the True;Who sighs incessantly for you:Whose whole Delight, now you are gone,Is to retire to Shades alone,And to the Eccho's make his Moan.By purling Streams the wishing Youth is laid,Still sighing Iris! lovely charming Maid!See, in thy Absence, how thy Lover dies;While to his Sighs, the Eccho still replies.Then with the Stream he holds discourse:O thou that bend'st thy liquid forceTo lovely Tames! upon whose ShoreThe Maid resides, whom I adore!My Tears of love upon thy Surface bear: And if upon thy Banks thou seest my Fair,In all thy softest Murmurs sing, From Damon I this Present bring;My e'ery Curl contains a Tear!Then at her Feet thy Tribute pay:But haste, O happy Stream! away; Lest charm'd too much, thou shoud'st for ever stay.And thou, O gentle, murm'ring Breeze!That plays in Air, and wantons with the Trees;On thy young Wings, where gilded Sun-beams play,To Iris my soft Sighs convey,Still as they rise, each Minute of the Day:But whisper gently in her Ear;Let not the ruder Winds thy Message hear,Nor ruffle on dear Curl of her bright Hair.Oh! touch her Cheeks with sacred Reverence,And stay not gazing on her lovely Eye! But if thou bear'st her Rosie Breath from thence,'Tis Incense of that Excellence,That as thou mount'st, 'twill perfume all the Skies.Iris's ComplexionSay what you will, I am confident, if you will confess your Heart, you are,
every time you view yourself in me, surpriz'd at the Beauty of your
Complexion; and will secretly own, you never saw any thing so fair. I am
not the first Glass, by a thousand, that has assur'd you of this. If you
will not believe me, ask Damon; he tell it you every Day, but that Truth
from him offends you; and because he loves too much, you think his Judgment
too little; and since this is so perfect, that must be defective. But 'tis
most certain, your Complexion is infinitely fine, your Skin soft and
smooth, as polisht Wax, or Ivory, extreamly white and clear; though if any
Body speaks but of your Beauty, an agreeable Blush casts itself all over
your Face, and gives you a thousand new Graces.And then two Flowers, newly born,Shine in your Heav'nly Face:The Rose, that blushes in the Morn,Usurps the Lilly's place:Sometimes the Lilly does prevail,And makes the gen'rous Crimson pale.IRIS'S HairOh, the beautiful Hair of Iris! It seems, as if Nature had crown'd you with
a great Quantity 
of lovely fair brown Hair, to make us know, that you
were born to Rule; and to repair the Faults of Fortune, that has not given
you a Diadem: And do not bewail the Want of that (so much your Merit's due)
since Heaven has so gloriously recompens'd you with what gains more
admiring Slaves.Heav'n for Sovereignty, has made your form:And you were more than for dull Empire born.O'er Hearts your Kingdom shall extend,Your vast Dominion know no end.Thither the Loves and Graces shall resort;To Iris make their Homage, and their Court.No envious Star, no common Fate,Did on my Iris Birth-day wait;But all was happy, all was delicate.Here Fortune wou'd inconstant be in vain:Iris, and Love, eternally shall reign.Love does not make less use of your Hair for new Conquests, than of all the
rest of your Beauties that adorn you. If he takes our Hearts with your fine
Eyes, it ties 'em fast with your Hair; and if it weaves a Chain, not easily
broken. It is not of those sorts of Hair, whose harshness discovers ill
Nature; nor of those, whose Softness shews us the Weakness of the Mind: Not
that either of these are Arguments without Exception; but 'tis such as
bears the Character of a perfect Mind, and a delicate Wit; and for its
Colour, the most faithful, discreeet, and beautiful in the World; such as
shews a Complexion and Constitution, neither so 
cold, to be insensible;
nor so hot, to have too much Fire; that is, neither too white, nor too
black; but such a mixture of the two Colours, as makes it the most
agreeable in the World.'Tis that which leads those captivated Hearts,That bleeding at your Feet do lie.'Tis that the Obstinate converts,That dare the Power of Love deny.'Tis that which Damon so admires;Damon, who often tells you so.If from your Eyes Love takes his Fires,'Tis with your Hair he strings his Bow:Which touching but the feather'd Dart,It never mist the destin'd Heart.IRIS'S EyesI believe, my fair Mistress, I shall dazle you with the Lustre of your own
Eyes. They are the finest Blue in the World: They have all the Sweetness,
that ever charm'd the Heart; with a certain Languishment that's
irresistable; and never any look'd on 'em, that did not sigh after 'em.
Believe me, Iris, they carry unavoidable Darts and Fires; and whoever
expose themselves to their Dangers, pay for their Imprudence.Cold as my solid Chrystal is,Hard and impenetrable too;Yet I am sensible of Bliss,When your charming Eyes I view:REven by me, their Flames are felt;And at each Glance, I fear to melt.Ah, how pleasant are my Days!How my glorious Fate I bless!Mortals never knew my Joys,Nor Monarchs guest my Happiness.Every Look that's soft and gay,Iris gives me every Day.Spight of her Vertue, and her Pride,Every Morning I am blestWith what to Damon is deny'd;To view her when she is undrest.All her Heaven of Beauty's shownTo triumphing Me----alone. Scarce the prying Beams of Light,Or th' impatient God of Day,Are allow'd so dear a Sight,Or dare prophane her with a Ray;When she has appear'd to me,Like Venus rising from the Sea.But Oh! I must those Charms conceal,All too Divine for vulgar Eyes:Shou'd I my secret Joys reveal,Of sacred Trust I break the Tyes;And Damon wou'd with Envy die,Who hopes, one Day, to be as blest as I.Extravagant with my Joys, I have stray'd beyond my Limits; for I was
telling you of the wondrous Finess of your Eyes; which no Mortal 
can 
resist, nor any Heart stand the force of their Charms; and the most
difficult Conquests they gain, scarce cost 'em the Expence of a Look. They
are modest and tender, chaste and languishing. There you may take a View of
the whole Soul, and see Wit and Good Nature (those two inseparable Vertues
of the Mind) in an extraordinary Measure. In fine, you see all that fair
Eyes can produce, to make themselves ador'd. And when they are angry, they
strike an unresistable Awe upon the Soul: And those Severities, Damon
wishes, may perpetually accompany them, during their Absence from him; for
'tis with such Eyes, he wou'd have you receive all his Rivals.Keep, lovely Maid, the Softness in your Eyes,To flatter Damon with another Day:When at your Feet the ravish'd Lover lies,Then put on all that's tender, all that's gay:And for the Griefs your Absence makes him prove;Give him the softest, dearest Looks of Love.His trembling Heart with sweetest Smiles caress,And in your Eyes, soft Wishes let him find;That your Regret of Absence may confess,In which, no Sense of Pleasure you cou'd find:And to restore him, let your faithful EyesDeclare, that all his Rivals you Despise.RThe Mouth of IRISI perceive your Modesty wou'd impose Silence on me: But, O fair Iris, Do
not think to present yourself before a Glass, if you wou'd not have it tell
you all your Beauties: Content yourself, that I only speak of 'em, en
Passant; for thou'd I speak what I wou'd, I shou'd dwell all Day upon each
particular, and still say something new. Give me Liberty then to speak of
your fine Mouth: You need only open it a little, and you will see the most
delicate Teeth, that ever you beheld; the whitest, and the best set. Your
Lips are the finest in the World; so round, so soft, so plump, so dimpled,
and of the loveliest Colour. And when you smile, Oh! What Imagination can
conceive how sweet it is, that has not seen you Smiling? I cannot describe
what I so admire; and 'tis in vain to those, who have not seen Iris.O Iris! boast that one peculair charm,That has so many Conquests made;So innocent, yet capable of harm;So just itself, yet has so oft betray'sWhere a thousand Graces dwell,And wanton round in e'ery Smile.A thousand Loves do listen when you speak,And catch each Accent as it flies:Rich flowing Wit, when e're you Silence break,Flows from your Tongue, and sparkles in your Eyes.Whether you talk, or silent are;Your Lips immortal Beauties were. The Neck of IRISAll your Modesty, all your nice Care, cannot hide the ravishing Beauties of
your Neck; we must see it, Coy as you are; and see it the whitest, and
finest shap'd, that ever was form'd. Oh! Why will you cover it? You know,
all handsome things wou'd be seen. And Oh! how often have you made your
Lovers envy your Scarf, or any thing that hides so fine an Object from
their sight. Damon himself complains of your too nice Severity. Pray do not
hide it so carefully. See how perfectly turn'd it is; with small blue
Veins, wandring and ranging here and there, like little Rivulets, that
wanton o'er the flowry Meads. See how the round white rising Breasts heave
with every Breath, as if they disdain'd to be confin'd to a Covering; and
repel the malicious Cloud, that wou'd obscure their Brightness.Fain I wou'd have leave to tellThe Charms that on your Bosom dwell;Describe it like some flow'ry Field,That does ten thousand Pleasures yield;A thousand gliding Springs and Groves;All Receptacles for Loves.But Oh! what Iris hides, must beEver sacred kept by me.R The Arms and Hands of IRISI shall not be put to much trouble to shew you your Hands and Arms, because
you may view them without my help; and you are very unjust, if you have not
admir'd 'em a Thousand times. Tho beautiful Colour and Proportion of your
Arm is unimitable, and your Hand is dazling, fine, small, and plump;
long-pointed Fingers, delicately turn'd; dimpl'd on the Snowy out-side, but
adorn'd within with Rose, all over the soft Palm. O Iris! nothing equals
your fair Hand; that Hand, of which Love so often makes such use to draw
his Bow, when he wou'd send the Arrow home with more success; and which
irresitibly wounds those, who possibly, have not yet seen your Eyes: And
when you have been veil'd, that lovely Hand has gain'd you a thousand
Adorers. And I have heard Damon say; Without the Aid of more Beauties, that
alone had been sufficient to have made an absolute Conquest o'er his Soul.
And he has often vow'd, It never touch'd him, but it made his Blood run
with little irregular Motions in his Veins; his Breath beat shore and
double; his Blushes rise, and his very Soul dance.Oh! how the Hand the Lover ought to prize,'Bove any one peculiar Grace,While he is dying for the Eyes,And doting on the lovely Face.The Unconfid'ring little knows,How much he to this Beauty owes.That when the Lover absent is,Informs him of his Mistress Heart.'Tis that, which gives him all his Bliss,When dear Love-Secrets 'twill impart.That plights the Faith the Maid bestows:And that confirms the tim'rous Vows.'Tis that betrays the Tenderness,Which the too bashful Tongue denies.'Tis that, that does the Heart confess,And spares the Language of the Eyes.'Tis that, which Treasures gives so vast:Ev'n Iris 'twill to Damon give at last. The Grace and Air of IRISThe Grace and Air of IRIS.'Tis I alone, O charming Maid! that can shew you that noble part of your
Beauty: That generous Air, that adorns all your lovely Person, and renders
every Motion and Action perfectly adorable. With what a Grace you walk! ---How
free, how easie, and how unaffected! See how you move; ---for only here you
can see it. Damon has told you a thousand times, that never any Mortal had
so glorious an Air; but he cou'd not half describe it, nor wou'd you credit
even what he said; but with a careless Smile, pass it off for the Flattery
of a Lover. But here behold, and be convinc'd; and know, no part of your
Beauty can charm more than this. O Iris, confess, Love has adorn'd you with
all his Art and Care. Your Beauties are the Themes of all the Muses; who
tell you in daily songs, that the Graces themselves have not R4 
more 
than Iris. And one may truly say, that you alone know how to joyn the
Ornaments and Dress, with Beauty; and you are still adorn'd, as if that
Shape and Air had a peculiar Art to make all things appear gay and fine.
Oh, how well drest you are! How every thing becomes you! Never singular,
never gawdy; but always suiting with your Quality.Oh, how that Negligence becomes your Air!That careless flowing of your Hair,That plays about with wanton Grace,With every Motion of your Face:Disdaining all that dull Formality,That dares not move the Lip, or Eye; But at some fancy'd Grace's cost;And think, with it, at least, a Lover lost. But the unlucky Minute to reclaim,And ease the Coquet of her Pain,The Pocket-Glass adjusts the Face again:Re-sets the Mouth, and languishes the Eyes;And thinks, the Spark that ogles that way---dies.Of Iris learn, O ye mistaken Fair!To dress your Face, your Smiles, your Air.Let easie Nature all the Bus'ness do;She can the softer Graces shew:Which Art but turns to Ridicule;And where there's none, serves but to shew the Fool.In Iris you all Graces find;Charms without Art, a Motion unconfin'd;Without Constraint, she smiles, she looks, she talks; And without Affectation, moves and walks.Beauties so perfect ne'er were seen: O ye mistaken Fair! Dress ye by Iris Mien. The Discretion of IRISBut O Iris! The Beauties of the Body are imperfect, if the Beauties of the
Soul do not advance themselves to an equal height. But, O Iris! What Mortal
is there so damned to Malice, that does not, with Adoration, confess, that
you (O charming Maid!) have an equal Portion of all the braveries and
Vertues of the Mind? And, who is it, that confesses your Beauty, that does
not, at the same time acknowledge and bow to your Wisdom? The whole World
admires both in you; and all, with impatience, ask, Which of the two is
most surprising, your Beauty, or your Discretion? But we dispute in vain on
that excellent Subject; for after all, 'tis determin'd, that the two Charms
are equal. 'Tis none of those idle Discretions that consists in Words
alone, and ever takes the shadow of Reason for the Substance; and that
makes use of all the little Artifices of Subtilty, and florid Talking, to
make the outside of the Argument appear fine, and leave the inside wholly
mis-understood: Who runs away with Words, and never thinks of Sence. But
you, O lovely Maid! never make use of these affected Arts; but without
being too brisk, or too severe; too silent, or too talkative; you aspire in
all your Hearers, a Joy, and a Respect. Your Soul is an Enemy to that usual
Vice of your Sex, of using little Arguments against the Fair; or by a Word,

or Jest, make your self and Hearers pleasant, at the Expence of the
Fame of others.Your Heart is an Enemy to all Passions, but that of Love. And this is one
of your noble Maxims: That every one ought to love, in some part of his
Life: And that, in a Heart truly brave, Love is without Folly: that Wisdom
is a Friend in Love, and Love to perfect Wisdom. Since these Maxims are
your own, do not, O charming Iris! resist that noble Passion: And since
Damon is the most tender of all your Lovers, answer his Passion with a
noble Ardour: Your Prudence never fails in the Choice of your Friends; and
in chusing so well your Lover, you will stand an eternal President to all
unreasonable fair Ones.O thou that dost excel in wit and Youth!Be still a President for Love and Truth.Let the dull World say what it will,A noble Flame's unblameable.Where a fine Sent'ment, and soft Passion rules,They scorn the Censure of the Fools.Yield, Iris, then; Oh, yield to Love!Redeem your dying Slave from pain:The World your Conduct must approve:Your Prudence never acts in vain. The Goodness and Complaisance of IrisWho but your Lovers (fair Iris!) doubts, but you are the most complaisant
Person in the World: And that with so much Sweetness you oblige all, that
you command 
in yielding; and as you gain the Heart of both Sexes, with the
Affability of your noble Temper; so all are proud and vain of obliging you.
And Iris, you may live assur'd that your Empire is eternally establish'd,
by your Beauty, and your Goodness: Your Power is confirm'd, and you grow in
Strength every Minute: Your Goodness gets you Friends, and your Beauty
Lovers.This Goodness is not one of those, whose Folly renders it easie to every
Desirer; but a pure Effect of the Generosity of your Soul; such as Prudence
alone manages, according to the Merit of the Person, to whom it is
extended; and those whom you esteem, receive the sweet Marks of it; and
only your Lovers complain: Yet even then you charm. And though sometimes
you can be a little disturb'd, yet through your Anger, your Goodness
shines; and you are but too much afraid, that that may bear a false
Interpretation: For oftentimes Scandal makes that pass for an Effect of
Love, which is purely that of Complaisance.Never had any Body more Tenderness for their Friends, than Iris: Their
Presence gives her Joy; their Absence, Trouble; and when she cannot see
them, she finds no Pleasure, like speaking of them obligingly. Friendship
reigns in your Heart, and Sincerity on your Tongue. Your Friendship is so
strong, so constant, and so tender, that it charms, plseases, and satisfies
all, that are not your Adorers. 'Tis therefore, Damon is excusable, if he
be not contented with your noble Friendship 
 
alone; for he is the most
tender of that Number.No! Give me all, th' impatient Lover cries;Without your Soul, I cannot live:Dull Friendship cannot mine suffice,That dies for all you have to give.The Smiles, the Vows, the heart must all be mine:I cannot spare one Thought, or Wish of thine.I sigh, I languish all the Day;Each Minute ushers in my Groans:To ev'ry God in vain I pray;In e'ry Grove repeat my Moans.Still Iris Charms are all my Sorrows Themes!They pain me Waking, and they wreck in Dreams.Return, fair Iris! Oh, return!Lest sighing long, your Slave destroys.I wish, I rave, I faint, I burn;Restore me quickly all my Joys:Your Mercy else, will come too late.Distance in Love more cruel is, than Hate.The Wit of IrisYou are deciev'd in me, fair Iris, if you take me for one of those ordinary
Glasses, that represent the Beauty only of the Body; I remark to you also
the Beauties of the Soul: And all about you declares yours the finest that
ever was formed; that you have a Wit that surprizes, and is always new:
'Tis none of those that loses its Lustre, when one considers it; 
the 
more we examine yours; the more adorable we find it. You say nothing, that
is not at once agreeable and solid; 'tis always quick and ready, without
Impertinence, that little Vanity of the Fair; who, when they know they have
Wit, rarely manage it so, as not to abound in Talking; and think, that all
they say must please, because luckily, they sometimes chance to do so. But
Iris never speaks, but 'tis of use; and gives a Pleasure to all that hears
her. She has the perfect Art of penetrating, even the most secret Thoughts.
How often have you know, without being told, all that has past in Damon's
Heart? For all great Wits are Prophets too:Tell me; Oh, tell me! Charming Prophetess;For you alone can tell my Love's Success.The Lines in my dejected Face,I fear, will lead you to no kind Result:It is your own, that you must trace;Those of your Heart you must consult.'Tis there, my Fortune I must learn,And all that Damon does concern.I tell you, that I love a Maid,As bright as Heav'n, of Angel-hue:The softest, Nature ever made:Whom I, with Sighs and Vows, pursue.Oh, tell me, charming Prophetess! Shall I this lovely Maid possess?A thousand Rivals do obstruct my Way;A thousand Fears they do create:They throng about her all the Day,Whilst I at awful Distance wait.Say, will the lovely Maid so fickle prove,To give my Rivals Hope, as well as Love?She has a thousand Charms of Wit,With all the Beauty Heav'n e're gave:Oh! Let her not make use of it,To flatter me into the Slave.Oh! Tell me Truth, to ease my Pain:Say rather, I shall die by her Disdain. The Modesty of IrisI Perceive, fair Iris, you have a Mind to tell me, I have entertain'd you
too long, with a Discourse on yourself. I know, your Modesty makes this
Declaration an offence, and you suffer me, with Pain, to unveil those
Treasures you wou'd hide. Your Modesty, that so commendable a Vertue in the
Fair, and so peculiar to you, is here a little too severe: Did I flatter
you, you shou'd blush: Did I seek, by praising you, to shew an Art of
Speaking finely, you might chide. But, O Iris! I say nothing, but such
plain Truths, as all the World can witness are so. And so far I am from
Flattery, that I seek no Ornament of Words. Why do you take such Care to
conceal your Vertues? They have too much Lustre, not to be seen, in spight
of all your Modesty: Your Wit, your Youth, and Reason 
oppose
themselves against this dull Obstructer of our Happiness. Abate, O Iris, a
little of this Vertue, since you have so many other, to defend yourself
against the Attacks of your Adorers.You yourself have the least Opinion of your own Charms: And being the only
Person in the World, that is not in love with 'em, you hate to pass whole
Hours before your Looking-Glass; and to pass your time, like most of the
idle Fair, in dressing, and setting off those Beauties, which need so
little Art. You, more wise, disdain to give those Hours to the Fatigue of
Dressing, which you know so well how to employ a thousand Ways. The Muses
have blest you, above your Sex; and you know how to gain a Conquest with
your Pen, more ablsolutely, than all the industrious Fair, who trust to
Dress and Equipage.I have a thousand things to tell you more, but willingly resign my place to
Damon, that faithful Lover; he will speak more ardently than I. For, let a
Glass use all its Force, yet, when it speaks its best, it speaks but
coldly.If my Glass, O charming Iris! have the good Fortune (which I cou'd never
entirely boast) to be believ'd, 'twill serve, at least, to convince you, I
have not been so guilty of Flattery, as I have a thousand times been
charg'd. Since then my Passion is equal to your Beauty (without Comparison,
or End) believe, O lovely Maid! how I sigh in your Absence: And be
perswaded to lessen my pain, and restore me to my Joys; for 
there is
no Torment so great, as the Absence of a Lover from his Mistress; of which,
this is the Idea. The Effects of Absence from what we loveThou one continu'd Sigh! all over Pain!Eternal Wish! but wish, alas, in vain!Thou languishing, impatient Hoper on;Abusie Toiler, and yet still undone!A breaking Glimpse of distant Day,Inticing on, and leading more astray.Thou Joy in Prospect, future Bliss extream;But ne're to be possest; but in a Dream.Thou fab'lous Goddess, which the ravish'd Boy,In happy Slumbers proudly did enjoy:But waking found an Airy Cloud be prest;His Arms came empty to his panting Breast.Thou Shade, that only haunts the Soul by Night;And when thou shou'dst inform, thou fly'st the Sight.Thou false Idea of the thinking Brain,That labours for the charming Form in vain; Which if by Chance it catch, thou'rt lost again.The End of the Looking-Glass.