The Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 1.BOSTON, MASS., SATURDAY, MARCH 24, 1894, PRICE 10 CENTS.WOMAN'S ERA CLUB
WILL HOLD AGRAND EASTER CARNIVAL
ON TUESDAY, APRIL 10and running four days and nights at ODD FELLOWS' HALL,
North Russell Street, Boston.The Carnival will open Tuesday afternoon at 8 o'clock with a reception to the Clergy. There will be aROSEBUD TEA RECEPTION on Wednesday afternoon and evening. Thursday will beCHILDREN'S DAY, this afternoon and evening the floor will be reserved for dancing for children under fifteen only. On the last evening there will be a Reception by the Club and A PROMENADE CONCERT.Fancy Goods for Sale during the Carnival. A fine Cafe in the hall below where lunches will be served reasonably, and homemade pies, cakes, etc., will be on sale.Single Admission - - - 10c.
Childrens' Day [Children] - 25c.LUCY STONE.No movement begun in the interest of human progress can start unmindful of the pioneer work projected and carried on by "the saints and martyrs who are on the eternal side of right." Foremost among these consecrated spirits, and serenest singer of them all stands, and will ever stand, the name of Lucy Stone, and although many months have passed since she whispered this her last message to her followers, "Make the world better," and then rested from her labors, yet to the many tributes already paid must ours be added lest the circle be incomplete. The public life of Lucy Stone begun early as all ardent, consistent and persistent abolitionist, and only after the emancipation of a race was secured did she consecrate herself to the work of freeing her sex from the many legal disabilities under which they rested, serenely indifferent to their humiliating position until some conspicuous case of the miscarriage of justice awoke them to a realizing sense of the helplessness of an unrepresented class, and to a suspicion, that law and equity was not always interpreted to mean the same thing for that class. For her untiring efforts to smooth the rough paths for all women, and for the strength and dignity she lent to their own feeble efforts to make life easier, we would have all women everywhere remember the debt they owe her. To the dismay of her loving, trusting followers she was mustered out of this, into higher service before the full realization of her dream of the complete disenthrallment of woman was realized; yet she lived long enough to see the world moving steadily, if slowly, on to the perfection she demanded of it. Let her fragrant memory be kept alive as a quicking force for all women who feel the responsibility of the part they must play in the coming regeneration of the world.NEWS FROM THE CLUBS.New York Letter.Mrs. W.E. Matthews, president, Mrs. G. S. Garnet, 1st vice-president; Miss M. R. Lyons, 2nd vice president; Mrs. J. E. Garner, treasurer; Miss G. E. Johnson, financial secretary; Miss S. E. Frazier, recording secretary - Mrs. S. E. Ward, corresponding secretary with the following executive board:--Mrs. A. C. Dixon, Mrs. E. P. Dalton, Mrs. A. D. Lee, Mrs. A. R. Politte, De S. S. McKenney, Miss J. Imogene Howard, Mrs. C. Maxwell, Mrs. C. Joseph. Newly elected, Mrs. C. H. Attwell, Mrs. E. E Greene, Mrs. W. E Gross, Miss Anna Brooks, Clerk.Present membership upwards of 150. One article taken from their constitution will suffice as to information concerning organization object etc.Preamble, "We the Undersigned, desirous of doing our duty in this ouronr day and generation, believing that if one life shines the next one to it will catch the light.Object,--The object of The Woman's Loyal Union, shall be the diffusion of accurate and extensive information relative to the civil and social status of the Afro-American (i.e.)that they may be led to an intelligent assertion of their rights, and to a determination to unite in the employment of every lawful and judicious means to secure and to retain the unmolested exercise of the same.2nd. That the attention of conscientious, conservative, thinking people at large may be directed to the injustice of a practical denial to any class of citizens of that personal liberty and opportunity for happiness which is the unalienable perogativeprerogative of every human being."Washington Letter.Helen A. CookThe Washington Colored Woman's League was organized in '92. Its officers are Mrs. H.A. Cook, president, Mrs. J.B. Bruce, and S.I. Fleetwood, vice-presidents, Mrs. C.L. Gruinke, recording secretary, Mrs. A.J. Cooper, corresponding secretary, Mrs. F.D. Shaw, treasurer, and the Board of Managers, Mrs. J.P. Bailey and Mrs. C. Terrell, Misses M.J. Patterson, M. L. Jordan, and C.L. Franklin.This League has just issued its first annual report which cannot but prove interesting reading to ALL women. The club has reason to feel proud of its record and it is with pleasure that we make selections from the report by its President.The object of the Woman's League as outlined in the Articles of Incorporation, is "the education and improvement of colored women and the promotion of their interests." It was conceived that this improvement must proceed on two general lines; the training of the mind and of the hand; the formation of classes for educational and for industrial work; and the first essential was a place in which this work might be carried on. It was therefore proposed that a stock company be formed with not less than a thousand shares at five dollars per share. Also, that each member of the League should be requested to take five shares of stock (amounting to twenty-five dollars) only one of which would be paid for each year.This plan has been followed, with the result that 380 shares, equal in value to $1900 have been subscribed for. As only one-fifth of the whole amount is to be paid each year, only one fifth of the $1,900 will be immediately available. To this sum, however, must be added, $35, the price of 7 single shares of stock at $5 each, making $415.But this house, the property of the League especially adapted to its purposes, is still a thing of the future. Until it becomes an actual and substantial possession, the educational and industrial work before referred to must be carried on by some other means. To this end classes, which meet in the parlors of the Y. M. C. A., have been formed in German grammar and reading, in German conversation, in English Literature, and in Hygiene. Though they have assembled only a few times, they have been well attended, the largest class numbering twenty-one. In each one there has been such evidence of interest, even enthusiasm, as to make the meetings a real pleasure to the committee which has the work in hand.A series of three lectures, for the benefit of the girls of the High and Normal Schools and of the Eighth grade schools were offered by the Woman's League to the Trustees of the Public Schools and accepted. The first of the course, on Hygiene, by Dr. Julia R. Hall, and the second on Physical Culture, by Miss Mary P. Evans were delivered on the 12th and 26th of the present month. The third and last paper, on Dress, was read by Miss Elizabeth A. Cook on Friday, February 9th.Another endeavor in the line of mental training is the promised payment of half the salary ($10 per month) of a lady who is to be employed as a Kindergartner by the University Park Association.In the direction of Industrial Work I must first state that the League has two representatives in the Nurses' Training school, recently established in connection with the Medical Department of Howard University, that is to say, the League has paid the tuition fee of five dollars each. When the idea was first presented of including in our industrial efforts so admirable a feature as the instruction of trained nurses, the lectures at the Medical School had been in progress for some weeks and it was necessary for us to take our representatives from the classes already formed.The Industrial Association formed in 1884, nearly all of whose members were also members of the League, decided in June, to continue their work as a committee of the Woman's League. They accordingly gave up their separate organization, turning into the treasury of the League, $50 in money, and furniture valued at $35, with the stipulation that they might at any time give public entertainments or make any special effort to raise money for carrying on their special work.They are now engaged in a sewing school consisting of 88 pupils and 10 teachers. The directress is it lady whose knowledge and experience enable her to pursue the best methods of instruction. The Industrial Committee have also established in connection with the Sewing School a Mending Bureau by which they hope to accomplish several objects--to train the older girls in all kinds of repairing and mending, to keep up their interest by paying them a small sum for their work and to so manage the enterprise that after all expenses are paid, there will still be something left to provide material for the use of the school.To conclude, the Woman's League now has in progress:The purchase of a house and lot toward which $1,935 have been subscribed;A course of lectures delivered at the High School and at Howard University;Classes in German, English Literature and Hygiene;The instruction of two students in the Nurses Training School;A Sewing School and Mending Bureau;The payment of half the salary of a Kindergartner.May January 1895 find at far higher degree of advancement on all these lines and new avenues of usefulness opening in other directions.HELEN A. COOK, President.Kansas CityCiy.J. Silone Yates and A.H. JonesWOMEN'S LEAGUE.The Kansas City League was organized in February, '93. The constitution adopted was that drawn up by the Washington Association, although a few by-laws were added to meet the special needs of our case, as from the first we intended to make our work largely industrial in character, since in a young and rapidly growing city like our own constantly receiving an influx of various nationalities it is exceedingly necessary that the industrial avenues shall be open to our young people.The next step, in order to inspire confidence, gain permanence and be ready for the transaction of business was to become incorporated under the laws of Missouri. This was accomplished through the legal efforts of our friend, Lawyer Sublette. Committees were appointed for various departments of the work. About the first of April one room was rented and classes in fine needle work and in the English

branches were formed, the latter class consisted of old ladies over fifty years of age, yet in spite of their years and other difficulties they learned to write their names to read etc., by spending a portion of each Saturday afternoon with their teachers.By the first of May the league was financially able to move into larger quarters, four rooms were rented in a very pleasant, respectable quarter and tastily furnished through the co-operation of the league and the Attucks Club, the latter composed of gentlemen who represent the moral and intellectual bone and sinew of our city.During the month of May a dress-making department was added to the regular work of the league and it has been in operation ever since. We hope to add millinery, hairdressing and other industries as soon as practical. For the dressmaking department we purchased two sewing machines; aside from regular dressmaking we buy from the wholesale stores bails of gingham, white goods etc., to be made up into aprons, dresses, skirts waists, etc., by members, and these articles are sold at regular prices. By buying a little better grade of material than is usually given in the stores we create a demand for goods. During the summer months the ladies made the rent money, payments upon the machines, and other expenses in this manner and by selling ice cream and cake at the rooms.At stated times during the winter months coffee, sandwiches and oysters will be sold and at intervals entertainments will be given. We desire as soon as possible to buy a piece of property and conduct a regular industrial school, ladies exchange, and other matters we have in mind. It will require at least five hundred dollars cash to make even a beginning of purchasing and when we found that it would require some time to raise this amount among ourselves and that meanwhile we would in practise be as far from saving our girls as ever, we determined to make a beginning in rented property and if possible by results impress the public with the idea that such an association as ours was a necessity to the city.We are especially anxious to better the condition of women and girls, yet the first charitable work done by the league, and at its second meeting, was to collect money from the members to assist in sending an invalid boy to his home in the South.A colored woman was sentenced to be hung in Kansas City in June '93; having made a very thorough investigation of the entire case we were fully persuaded that Justice to the woman and above all to the womanhood of our race demanded that the sentence should at least be commuted to life imprisonment. We drew up and circulated a petition to this effect which was signed by a large number of the most prominent men and women of both races; from these parties nearly one hundred dollars was collected to defray the expense attending such an effort. The petition was taken to the Governor of the state by a worthy representative from the U. T. C. N. and the president of our league with the result that the sentenctsentence was commuted to a term of fifty years, although the death had already been set over the unfortunate woman.Several girls who have found themselves friendless and alone in our city have been provided for in our rooms until they could obtain employment. An orphan thought the agency of our society sent to a good home out of the city.Notice was brought to us of a blind woman whose little girls were in need of clothing. They were fitted out with gingham dresses and we intend to see that they are properly clothed for school during the winter and as much longer as is necessary.These are a few of the things accomplished thus far. We are very far from the results we wish so earnestly to bring ,about but we hope that to some extent we occupy a niche in the community. In addition to the regular meetings we have a Junior Society composed of young girls from fourteen years on through the average school age. This forms an auxiliary to the regular league and meets monthly. A mother's meeting also forms a part of the work, at which time, practical talks upon the rearing of children, housekeeping, homemaking etc., form the basis.J. SILONE YATES, President,A. H. JONES, Cor. Secretary.New Bedford,Ida V. LeeWOMEN'S LOYAL UNION.After the organization of the Women's Loyal Union, the idea of forming clubs among women began to grow in the minds of the women in other sections. Not least among them were the Women of New Bedford. Mrs. J. T. Fairfax and Mrs. Martha Webb were among those most zealous that Miss Wells should be heard in our city. They secured one hundred women to agree to labor earnestly and give Miss Wells an opportunity to lay her wrongs and those of our race before the people here. Miss Wells lectured in this city on the sixth of February and for that night's work those one hundred women pledged themselves to make what was then the Wells Circle a permanent organization. About April the Wells Circle became an established club with a membership of about twenty. Matters pertaining to our race in any way were discussed at each monthly meeting. Finally it was thought best to engage in more active work, and in July the name was changed to the Woman's Loyal Union. It was at the July meeting that each member agreed to bring as many names as she could secure toward forming a committee of one hundred or more who would pledge themselves to trade with the dry goods dealer employing a colored girl. Three or four important stores were visited. The result seemed then rather encouraging. One proprietor refused to do anything whatsoever for a colored girl, the second would give no direct answer either way but said if he had a place for an inexperienced girl, he would employ a colored girl. The third promised, after three days consideration, to employ a colored girl as soon as a place was found. That was three months ago, and yet new faces appear behind the counters of these stores. Since that time (last November), the monthly meetings have been poorly-attended, and all interest seems to have become dormant, except in the minds of eight or ten women. It is sincerely hoped that something can be done soon to arouse our women to the need of their measuring arms with the women of other sister cities.
IDA V. LEE, Secretary.
It should strengthen and inspire the anxious to remember that in all advance movements, until the cause becomes a popular one, the burden is borne by the faithful few.  ED.Invincibles.This is a flourishing organization of women which has been in existence three years.
President, Mrs. E. Lewis; Vice President, Mrs. M. Walker; Treasurer, Mrs. H. Creighton; Secretary, Mrs. H. M. Greene.Lodge of Good Templars.Annie G. BrownThere is a Lodge of Good Templars formed and governed entirely by women which has been in existence for many years, and has done great good in the community where it exists, and the cause of temperance has no firmer or more powerful friends to-day than these women."Sisters! can you idly slumberWhile this curse of drink goes on,Can you calmly sit and numberFellow beings, one by one,On the field of battle falling,Sinking to a drunkard's grave?Up! the God of Peace is calling,Calling you to help and save."ANNIE G. BROWN.Boston.THE WOMAN'S ERA CLUB.Club Motto-"Help to make the world better."To give the general public an idea of the aim and design of this club an account of its public meeting held last Spring has been inserted. This excellent report was published by the Boston Reflector and we feel sure that it will prove interesting reading to sister clubs already formed and in embryo; remarks from so many notable club women will be read with interest, we have no doubt.Since this meeting, the club has grown to a membership of one hundred and four and has greatly enlarged its field of work. The chief feature of the club is its division into committees. These committees are formed to include every member of the club and are as follows--Ways and Means--matters pertaining to race, Domestic Science, Civics Literature, Philanthropy, Temperance, Current Events, Moral Reform, Press and Corative.Every other meeting of the club is in the hands of some one of these committees, which provide suitable subjects for discussion.As will he seen, the work of the club generally is chiefly educational, though each committee carries on practical work along its own line, with or without the active co-operation of the club. The Ways and Means Committee with the assistance of the whole club has just raised a scholarship for Atlanta University and the Domestic Science Committee has under consideration the agitation of more industrial training in certain of the public schools. The Committee on Civics is also preparing for a large meeting for the discussion of the civilization of Africa.Mrs. Josephine Ruffin presided, and in a few well chosen words introduced Mrs. LAURA ORMISTON CHANT of England. She assured the audience that if there is not a soul at the back of service one becomes a mere machine to one's children. Clubs make women read and think in order that they may not sit like idiots when some bright paper is being read.A great deal of the advice given to women about their staying at home, she said, is wrong altogether, for if a woman stays at home too much she will forget how to manage that home. At the club she will get new ideas from other women of how to live and manage her home, and great help in training her children, and to gain experience in various domestic trials. Women's clubs are educators of mothers and women who have not homes.Not all women are intended for mothers. Some of us have not the temperament for family life. 'Tis a parody on love to try to love those near you.Clubs will make women think seriously of their future lives, and not make girls think their only alternative is to marry. Clubs are great playgrounds for losing worry. A club teaches women to forget little cares and learn to discuss great things. Mutual admiration societies are better than scandal.MRS. FLORIDA RIDLEY, secretary of the club, read the following report:

The idea of a Woman's Club, not necessarily a colored woman's club, but a club started and led by colored women had been dormant in the minds of a few women of Boston for some time. Of women's clubs there seem to be no end, and the field for women's work in this direction so completely covered as to leave little room for a new struggler. And yet with so many organizations, many of which were willing and anxious to receive colored women as members, there seem to be reason and indeed an earnest call for an organization of colored women. There are so many questions which in their application to the race, demand special treatment, so many questions which, as colored women, we are called upon to answer, more than this, there was so much danger that numbers of women would be over-looked unless some special appeal was made to them, that in February last, at the time Miss Wells was creating so much interest in her crusade against lynch-law, it was it a good time to carry out the club's idea, call the women together and organize, not for race-work alone, but for work along all the lines that make for women's progress. The result was that a club was formed with a membership of twenty, which has been more than doubled since that-time.The actual work done by the club since its formation is small but most promising. Much of the time has been spent in getting into working order and in arousing interest. One practical effort, put forth by the club, however, has met with unexpected success. At the time of the Denmark lynching, it was thought and decided that we as colored women could not afford to overlook an event of such significance, we concluded to record a protest which should demand a little more attention than the usual form of resolutions, the result was that the leaflets were printed and sent in every direction. The responses that they have brought forth have been unexpectedly numerous and encouraging. More than one person has acknowledged that these leaflets have aroused them to a consideration of the subject, and more than one person of influence has announced their intention of doing something towards awakening public sentiment. Large demands for the leaflets have, been made, two hundred being called for at one time and a postal note being received from St. Louis calling for as many as could be spared.This reception of the leaflets has revealed to the club a line of work which has been little used and which the club can incorporate with its other work with advantage. This is the publication and circulation of matter that refers especially to the race, not alone, but also such matter as shall be for the advancement and encouragement of the race, and to quote from our constitution "to collect all facts obtainable, showing the moral, intellectual, industrial and social growth, and attainment of our-people."To this end the club has under ction the publication of the answer, Ingalls on the Negro question by M Deitrict and the stand taken by College and Massachusetts legislature Lewis affair. The receipt of leafletssubjects such as the above among the  people generally South and West cou but be a welcome and hope-ispiringinspiring feature. "Another line of work of the club is the discussion of current topics. It is not our desire to narrow ourselves to race work, however necessary it is that such work should be done and particularly by colored women. It cannot but be admitted that we, as a race, have too frequently limited ourselves to this field with the result of contracting our vision, enfeebling our implusesimpulses and weakening our powers. We the women of the WOMEN'S ERA CLUB enter the field to work hand in hand with women, generally for humanity and humanity's interests, not the Negro alone but the Chinese, the Hawaiian. the Russian Jew, the oppressed everywhere as subjects for our consideration, not the needs of the colored women, but woman everywhere are our interest.The club now numbers forty-five, it is hoped to make it three times as large and to that end we invite all eligible women, black or white who are in sympathy with our cause to unite with us.MRS. LUCY STONE BLACKWELL spoke of the afternoon devoted to colored people, by one of the congresses at the Chicago Fair. At the congress she saw Mrs. Harper of Philadelphia, and another colored lady. It was grand to hear Mrs. Harper address that body of representatives from all parts of the world. Hon. Fred Douglass was there, and was asked to address the meeting.Mrs. Blackwell pathetically described how the venerable gentleman was chockedchoked with emotion to

see that he lived to witness the day when one of his sisters could address such an august body. Mrs. Blackwell cursorily viewed the life of Hon. Fred Douglass, and said that he was a pattern.MRS. EDNA D CHENEY, next spoke. She said she would speak especially to the ladies of the Women's Era Club.The New England Club asked her to bring their congratulations to the members of the Women's Era Club. Mrs. Cheney thought before coming, that it would be well to bring a few ideas as to the lines which the club should follow, but having heard the report from the secretary of the Women's Era Club she thought that they could teach her in the art of managing clubs.Mrs. Cheney also complimented the new club on the broad stand which it takes, stating, that it was the way to secure union. She referred to the elm tree, how it grew until its branches finally formed an arch, a great touch of the Cathedral. Mrs. Cheney was especially pleased to find that the club set no barrier. We are to have a great composite civilization in America.At the formation of many new clubs which Mrs. Cheney attended she was asked whether it would be right to leave politics and religion out. She replied emphatically no. It is there they are to learn and discuss such questions broadly, and they ought to find no better subjects to help them. It is such thought that is absolutely necessary, and puts one in nigh estimation, and enables one to cope with the questions of the day. Charles Sumner was able to do what he did by long training.MRS. ABBY MORTON DIAZ ex-president of the Woman's Industrial and Educational Union, was the next lady who addressed the meeting. Mrs. Diaz spoke on the philosophy of life. She said there is no subject of more importance to the human being than the subject of humanity. The highest question of human beings is the object of humanity. It is customary with calculators to determine life by the amount of work done for the sustainancesustenance of the body. But this was only animal. To enjoy thought in its highest angesranges?, music, art or any such hingthing is the highest of life. Mrs. Diaz holds that men's clubs should be on such basis; thought is the ideal.Go to these gatherings, and one will be able to get practical knowledge. She showed that in everything the feminine and masculine made the whole sphere. One without the other was incomplete. So to make the whole element was to join the two. Then people coming together is religion. The more we do this, the more religious we are. This is why Mrs. Diaz is in favor of this new club. Thought is the great leveller. When we get on the plain of intelligence, we are better together.MRS. A. H. SPAULDING, who was the next speaker was thoroughly in sympathy with the WOMEN'S ERA CLUB. Many years ago it was with great difficulty that she could join a club. The influence that was exercised over men in their clubs was anything but what it should be; and drawing conclusions of clubs from these, she objected to them. But Mrs. Spaulding found out that women's clubs took a different line. The WOMAN'S ERA CLUB is a happy arrangement, and what they need is the consideration of great questions together. Women must learn to think independently.Mrs. Spaulding said that she was glad to welcome the club into Boston club-life; glad to hear from the secretary's report such a broad and generous platform of principles. She said that she was thoroughly indignant at the injustice done a people whose only revenge was efforts to a higher education and a better equipment for the duties and responsibilities of a higher American citizenship.The Primrose Club.The Primrose Club consists of young women associated together under the auspices of St. Augustine's Church, Phillips street, Boston, for mutual improvement. There are at present twenty members, and classes are held for physical culture, embroidery, drawing and sketching in water colors. The teachers in each department are ladies of the greatest skill, and the club has been found to be of great service to the members. Occasional social entertaiments are given by the members in the Hall of St. Augustine's Trade Schools, where the meetings will be held in future.United Daughters of Zion.On November the 5tb, 1845, a number of women formed an association for the benefit of each other. It was officered and controlled entirely by women, and emblazoned on its banner were these words: "No Gentlemen Need Apply.The organization is carried on to-day by some of descendents of those independent women, who have long since joined the silent majority. The society is known as The United Daughters of Zion.Cambridge.Adelaide GrandisonGOLDEN RULE CLUB.Having with great pleasure read your prospectus, the Golden Rule Club of Cambridge heartily endorse the ideas set forth and wish you every success in your laudable undertaking, and hope your publication will live to be a powerful factor in the elevation of both the women and men of the race.The Golden Rule Club is an organization composed entirely of colored women, and was organized for social and benevolent purposes in the year 1883. As an organization we believe in a modest way we have been the means of accomplishing some good. We held. monthly meetings at the residence of one of the members to transact our business.Mrs. Henry Lewis was the first president, and under her able administration the club gained in membership and finances. During the eleven years that have passed there have been some changes in the club, but the majority of the original members are still working faithfully.The club has a strong, firm footing in Cambridge and the members intend to keep it and to live up to their motto, "The "Golden Rule."
Once more wishing your paper every success and progress, we remain,
Yours in behalf of the Golden Rule Club,ADELAIDE GRANDISON, Sec. 17 Hovey Ave., Cambridge.Providence, R. I.WORKING WOMEN'S LEAGUE.This club was organized in January, 1888. It is unique in design, and in its six years of life has grown in numbers and accumulated money. Besides being a beneficiarybenificiary society, it loans money on security, and has been able to invest in real estate. It now owns two lots of land that it intends in future to build upon. The officers are--President, Hannah N. Greene; Vice President, Martha R. Taylor; Secretary, Sarah D. Haines; Banking Officers, Sophia Walker, Georgia T. Brown, Maria R. Blunt; Treasurer, Saphronia, A. Jenkins.Domestic Science.PAPER NO. 1As the homes are so will the nation be, for the nation is nothing more than a collection of what is produced in the homes. The as it is oftener called, domestic science, is thus the very key-stone of the political arch. A civilized home may be fitly compared to a greenhouse in which are to be grown the choicest products of the people and over whose management the mother chief gductsbe ignorant, indifferent, or incompetent in the performance of her duties. So broad is the knowledge, so varied the skill, so incessant the performances demanded of her by her office that any woman might well tremble before her responsibilities. She must not only know how to keep her own health but how to foster and preserve the health of others, and this means that she must understand what is most wholesome to eat and drink and how food and beverage may be made most appetizing. Health for the whole household also demands that the housekeeper shall know the evil effects of dust-catching carpets, draperies, and stuffed furniture in small, crowded city apartments, as the comfort of the whole household likewise depends on her not filling the dwelling with more than can be easily cared for and kept in exquisite cleanliness. She must understand what constitutes the best bedding from the standpoint of durability, comfort and healthfulness, for as a third of every human life is spent in sleep, the sleeping-place is a matter deserving profound consideration. She must understand something of plumbing, of drainage, of heating, lighting and ventilation, for the germs of fevers and diphtheria lurk in bad plumbing and bad drainage, catarrhs and consumption are born of over-heated ill-lighted, and unventilated houses and all bodily and mental weaknesses may be traced to ignorance of the science of sound living. But not yet have we come to the end of the list of the good housewife's requirements. She must comprehend not only what food should be eaten in order to have the best nourishment at the least expense, but how to buy it, and how to cook it, for she may impoverish her family by ignorant purchasing, and even should she not have to cook it herself, she can never be sure of having food well-cooked unless she herself understands what good cooking is according to scientific principles. And she must also know everything possible to know about kitchen fuel, unlessthe family earningin buying every article that comes into the household, that by her wise investments she shall save time that would otherwise be wasted in constant shopping, save time in making garments of durable, instead of flimsy, perishable material, and save money in buying what is really good and lasting of its kind instead of what only makes a good show for a brief season. But though the housewife starts out on her career equipped with all knowledge as to fuel, food, drink, furnishings, clothing, drainage, plumbing, heating, lighting, and ventilation, not even yet has she learned the full course requisite for wise home-making. All this is but a preparation of the soil for the plants that are to be grown in one of the nation's private gardens. The wisdom needed to tend the plants themselves--the little children, who arc to be reared not only in health, knowledge, and industry, but in happiness (for happiness in a home is as essential as any other good feature), what preparation can too well fit a mother for this branch of domestic science? The mother thoroughly trained in domestic science will have learned all that the experience of other parents has collected and recorded in those cyclopaedias of childhood known as Babyhood, the Mothers' Nursery Guide, and so on, edited by wise teachers and physicians, she will have carefully studied the principles of kindergarten culture. She will steer safely between the dangers of over-indulgence on the one hand and over-severity on the other, and until each little human plant has gained a firm start in life, a wise domestic scientist will make its welfare her highest consideration.Now it must be apparent to a reflecting person that she is a rare woman, and rarely situated in life, who can even faithfully superintend, much less herself perform, as they should be performed, all that I have here sketched as the duties of a wife, mother and housekeeper in our modern civilization.In our modern  Does the  with an independent inc few or no children, and  or many servants, live, d and have her being thus without considering all the cost of imitation at once the woman with no fixed income, with many children and with no servants, strives to rival the other's expenditure. O! the folly of the things bought, not because they are at all needed, or really for themselves wanted, but bought simply because Mrs. so-and-so has them. O! the misery of debts contracted, of money wasted simply and solely for the sake of doing what other people do.The first result of a true training in domestic science is the gaining of courage to be one's own self, to live one's own life, to model one's own home in blissful independence of the rule of that social tyrant, Mrs. Grundy, the courage to have one's floors bare and serviceably painted, if one cannot afford a carpet in the first place, or the still greater expense of having a carpet properly and frequently renovated thereafter. The courage to have sleeping-rooms and kitchen well and comfortably furnished and equipped, even if the parlor has to wait long for any furniture whatever. Here the domestic scientist is strong. Honest comfort and health she will have first, luxury, if it come at all must wait her perfect convenience. The domestic scientist will begin her career by determining to sometime own her own home: for this she will plan, manage, and save, here a little, and there a little until her dream becomes a reality. National solmity demands ownership of indivi-individ-
ual homes. Life under another man's roof is unstable, whether it be in a West End tenement or in a gaudy apartment on the Back Bay. There is no greater joy in material possession than the joy of the home built as a result of one's own saving and planning.But while so large a part of the population have to live close together in apartments, high and low, a great field lies before the domestic avor  this  good I believe to be some form of cooperation, by which a dozen housewives living under the same roof may be spared the necessity of carrying on, separately, the same branch of labor. It may not be practicable to have one stove do the work which it could do just as well as the dozen separate stoves, to have one cook with one or two; assistants, do the work which she could do just as well as twelve separate cooks; for there would be great difficulty in suiting the tastes of twelve families and in serving the food hot in twelve separate dining-rooms, and without a separate dining-room for each family the best feature of home-life is gone. But I do not see why it is not perfectly practicable among any group of friends in a neighborhood to have the laundry-work in co-operation. There are many ways in which this might be done, but when it is remembered that one fire will heat as many irons as three separate fires, that two women working together can do nearly three times the work of one woman working separately, everyone must see the actual saving in expense, to say nothing of comfort, in even the simplest method of consolidation. Men long ago learned that better work was done by division of labor. This lesson housewives will be forced to learn if they do not want to sink beneath a mountain of toil and trouble and become mere stolid, patient drudges. It is a law of nature that there is a corresponding loss for every gain, and the gain in mental culture to the inhabitants of cities has been attended by a loss in physical strength. The complexity of city life, with its incessant drain upon the mental faculties and the sympathies, render it more and more impossible each year, for the average housewife to keep in touch even with her acquaintances, to say nothing of charities, clubs and church-work, and at the same time comfortably bear the burden of domestic life as her ancestors bore it under more primitive conditions. Wisdom dictates that women, as well as men, should make machinery do such hard drudgery as that of the laundry. The woman's club that would seize this idea and put it into practical operation would, indeed, open a new Woman's Era. As we look around us at the waste, discomfort, even misery, arising from the ignorance which prevails over the great mass of so-called homes, it is hard to think of waiting patiently, as we must wait, while the slow, levenleaven of growing knowledge raises this mass to better living.Editorial Notes.Ellen Battelle DeitrickELLEN BATTELLE DEITRICK.The account of the first public meeting of the Woman's Era Club is lengthy, but will repay reading.It is pleasant to record a number of subscriptions on the strength of the prospectus alone. May the subscribers never have reason to regret their actions. The WOMAN'S ERA hopes to succeed on its merits.The last public speech made by Lucy Stone in Boston was given to the Woman's Era Club. The night of the meeting was an intensely hot one and Mrs. Stone's strength was then on the wane but she cheerfully left her home on the breezy heights of Pope's Hill, and came down into the hot, dusty city, to give almost her last, as were her first public services given, in the interests of the colored people.The article on Domestic Science which appears in this number of the WOMAN'S ERA was read before the Woman's Era Club in January and led to an interesting discussion. Mrs. Dietrick is a prolific writer and an authority on the subject of household economics. It is not too much to say that the great interest in household matters which is shown by the women of to-day, was aroused by the Women's clubs which were the first to consider the subject scientifically.The next number of the WOMAN'S ERA will contain an article on the N. E. Women's Hospital by Mrs. Eduah D. Cheney. Colored women have always been in evidence at this hospital, either as nurses or internes, and it is to the keen foresight and generous cosmopolitanism of Mrs. Cheney, who as one of the founders of the hospital insisted upon no race lines, that we owe the opening up of this trained industry to the coloaedcolored young women.Mrs. W. E. Matthews (Victoria Earle) the talented president of the Woman's Loyal Union of New York and Brooklyn, writes as follows: "I should be glad to have our Union represented in your forthcoming issue. I think with you that it (the paper,) is a positive necessity--for as the trend is toward organization among our women as among others, it will truly serve not only as a centralization of ideas, but will stimulate and encourage and revive the hopes of those now earnestly engrossed in the work of organization of women generally. I sincerely rejoice in any effort put forward for the advancement of our women. Such endorsement from such a source means much to us.THE REFERENDUM.--much misunderstanding exists concerning the recent Supreme Court decision on the matter of the "referendum." Evidently it is thought by many that the decision deals a death blow to woman suffrage in this State. This is not so. The court was asked to rule on the constitutionality of three points, raised by the opponents of Woman suffrage in the Massachusetts legislature, and decided that all three forms of referendum were unconstitutional, and could not therefore be submitted to a popular vote. The matter stands now just where it did before, in the hands of the legislature, which has ample power to immediately pass a law giving full municipal suffrage to women.It would take a paper twice the size of the WOMEN'S ERA to accommodate the matter that has come in for this issue. The publishers have been more than gratified by the hearty and ready response of our women, it is indeed gratifying to come into communion with so many fair-minded women. Should the paper receive proportionate financial encouragement the publishers will be only too ready and willing to enlarge it.A Congress of the colored women's leagues and clubs of the Country was suggested long ago should we not be moving in the matter now? Such a convention could not but prove a delightful as well as profitable occasion; the Washington Women's League by virtue of its superior age, size and power should be the first to move in the matter.PUBLISHERS' ANNOUNCEMENT.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the Woman's Era Club, and devoted to the Interests of the women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country; published monthly in Boston.JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, EDITOR.
FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, ASSISTANT EDITOR
MEDORA W. GOULD, LESLIE WILMOT M ELIZABETH JOHNSON, MARION RIDLEY, IRENE DE MORTIE, HANNAH SMITH BUTLER R WILSON, ESQ, GEORGE RUFFIN, Departmental Editors.Also a large number of Special Contributors.SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Rates to Clubs, One Hundred Copies,   -    7.00Checks, drafts audand post-office orders should be made payable to the Woman's Era. All communications should be addressed to"THE WOMAN'S ERA,"
St. Augustine's Trade School, Boston, Mass.EDITORIAL.GREETING.Of the makers of papers there be not a few, and an additional one may seem a superfluity unless a vacant spot is found in an apparently already overgrown field.Such a void, we think, exists, and it is to help fill it that we presume to make our first bow as editors of THE WOMAN'S ERA, to a long suffering but indulgent public. The need of such a journal has long been felt as a medium of intercourse and sympathy between the women of all races and conditions; especially true is this, of the educated and refined, among the colored women, members of which class may be found in every state from Maine to Florida, but in nearly all of these places an important factor, and one that receives little or no recognition, and the one more than all others which prevents her from making the most of herself and taking her legitamatelegitimate place among the advanced women, is the limitation of - her surroundings and the circumscribed sphere in which she must move. The impossibility of mingling freely with people of culture and learning, and so carrying on the mental growth begun in schools and colleges, shuts her in with her books but shuts her out of physical touch with the great world of art, science and letters which is open to all other ambitious women. In fact the stumbling block in the way of even the most cultured colored woman is the narrowness of her environment. But let the fact be emphthat in the a large and growing factor in the intellectual as well as industrial life of the country; and the strength of the chain of woman's advancement will be determined by the strength of this weak link. itIt is to help strengthen this link by hastening on the day when a keener appreciation of the hindrances of this class and a better understanding between all classes shall exist that this little venture is sent out on its mission.THE PROBLEM OF THE UNEMPLOYED.The presence in our cities of armies of unemployed, has opened the eyes of people to a serious problem and a possible danger. During the winter months many industries are always quiet and there are always many out of employment at such times, but the season that has passed has seen more than the usual number out of work for a longer time than usual; although appeals for aid have been generously met by the charitable, yet it takes more than money for such a crisis and just how such a crisis should be met or averted .)r prevented is and will be a subject for serious consideration.Although the problem of the unemployed is occupying the minds of earnest thinkers, yet it like the "Negro problem" seems to many laymen no problem at all. They both seem to be cases when a "judicious letting alone" would prove the solution, and which, if left to natural laws, would adjust themselves. Only give the negro an equal chance and then leave him alone to improve it, and he will come out all right. Stop coddling and make work for the unemployed and they would soon  places for themselves. It is his that men should otherhood  their  does mean t much false sentiment and  charity chiefly called out by a love of notoriety.Although there have been thousands of men and women dependent upon charity this winter, yet it is a fact that it has been just as difficult as ever to obtain farm and domestic help. Good farms everywhere are still being deserted because the men who should be tilling the soil are crowding into trades and factories that are already overflowing, and young housekeepers are still losing health and spirit because girls who would find good homes and wages in domestic service prefer to crowd shops and factories.But, some say, since this is the case what can be done about it, we can't make people do what they don't want to and we can't see them starve? No we can't, but we need not encourage people to do the things it would be best for them not to do, oftentimes many of the women who are urged to work in the interests of working-girls' homes and rests and clubs, etc., are women who themselves would gladly offer in their own homes a refuge for good girls and who are worn to death trying to do the work they are willing to pay to have done, and working in the interests of those who should not need to be worked for.Labor problems, in a large measure must be left to adjust themselves "creating work" for

the unemployed can do no permanent good. Let the people understand the law of supply and demand be made to realize the hopelessness of any chance of prosperity in those trades which are already too full. Such education would be of much more value to them both morally and financially than any possible system of "aids."There are cases of more than one factory girl out of work who when asked to go to service have replied that they "would starve before they became servants." There must be something wrong when such a situation is possible and if from the present distress men who should be working the earth and women who should be working in the house are led back to their proper field and are made to realize that the dignity of labor lies with the laborer entirely, the winter's suffering will not be in vain.DIFFICULTIES OF COLONIZATION.None but fools seriously believe that the colored people of the United States can be colonized without their consent. Their deportation would bankrupt the government. It would require one steamer carrying a thousand souls to sail every day to deport the thousand negro babies born daily. It would simply be impossible to convert the property of the colored people, amounting in round numbers to three hundred million dollars earned by them and one seventh of all the property of the government amounting to many millions more into cash, for of course any scheme of colonization which could hope to get the consent of the civilized world would have to secure to the people removed from the country their property. What kind of a commission, composed of what kind of men can be appointed by the ingenuity of human beings wise enough to determine where Ham leaves off and Japhet begins? Who is to say what men are colored and what men are white? The colored people decline to be driven from their homes and their country. Will some sage point out the part of the constitution wherein is found the law authorizing a government to deport one seventh of the people, the citizens, the makers and owners of the government? There is some authority for apprehending and exporting or punishing the blatant demagogues political or clerical, native or alien who go about the country preaching such stuff which tends to stir up the people and lead to internal dissension and sooner or later to strife and bloodshed. It is a physical and legal impossibility to deport the colored people. It is not impossible to keep out of the country the rifraff of other countries who owe no allegiance to man or God, who are opposed to any government that compels them to work for a living and to observe and not encroach upon the rights of other men. The audacity of foreigners who flee their native land and seek refuge here, many of them criminals and traitors, who are here but a day before they join in the hue and cry against the native born citizens of this land is becoming intolerable. No government upon earth would permit it but the United States, and all the signs of the times point to a time not far off where self defence and self protection will force this government to protect its own people and to teach foreigners that this land is for Americans black or white and that other men are welcome and can come here only by behaving themselves and steering clear of plots and schemes against the people and the citizens who are here by right.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.Look at our Club rates.FREE!Splendid Premium Offers.By special arrangement with the Boston Training School of Music, the Woman's Era is enabled to offer the following splendid premiums which offer we venture to say is unprecedented.READ. To the one who obtains the largest number of subfcribessubscribes, over one hundred, within the next six months we will give one year's tuition either in voice, violin, piano or harmony and counter point at the above-named school.For the second highest number of subscribers in the next six months we will offer a term at the Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute for the summer of '94, with instruction either in music, art, literature, elocution, oratory or shorthand and type-writing.For the three children over nine years of age, first obtaining fifty subscribers for us, a year's instruction on piano. This is for beginners.To all contestants failing to gain the premiums we will give a commission of twenty-five per cent.The Boston Training School of Music makes a specialty of the training of teachers of muiicmusic, it is a school of the highest grade and for these reasons and because this school has made no distinction on account of race, the management of this paper has selected it for its premium offers. The number of young people who come to Boston for a musical education increases yearly; through these premiums it is hoped to give a helping hand to worthy aspirants.A course in piano, voice, violin, theory, or harmony and counter point at the finest school of its kind in the country.For futherfurther particulars address the WOMEN'S ERA, St. Augustine's Trade Schools, North Grove street, Boston, Mass.Boston Condensed Milk Co'sPlain condensed (unsweetened) Milk is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. - Sold in jars at the office, 2 1-2 Park Square, Boston. Delivered three times per week.ENDORSEMENT,I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak puny baby into a strong, plump one after all other foods had failed.MRS. McGILL.
10 Lindell Pl., BostonLITERATUREMedora GouldEDITOR-MISS MEDORA GOULD.A fact greatly to be deplored is the ignorance among women of contemporary history and government. Ignorance of the past may be overlooked; but ignorance of the present is inexcusable, a]though contemporary history cannot be fully understood unless there is a knowledge of the past. This lack of knowledge among women i read the ,/gap> do not read  The average woman is content to read the sensational news, the fashion and the society columns, and pass over the more solid matter as uninteresting. The daily papers give a synopsis of the history of the world for the past twenty-four hours, and, if read understandingly, presents situations as startling and dramatic as are enacted on the stage at any time. It is not only necessary to know what to read, but it is also necessary to know what not to read. It is indicatativeindicative of a certain want of refinement in the mind that selects the murders, scandals divorces and such matter, to the exclusion of the larger things of life. The great attraction of French women lies in the fact that they take interest in the things in which men are interested, and keep themselves thoroughly in touch with the affairs of goveinmentgovernment.There is one room in the Boston Public Library of which very few women seem to be aware, or perhaps, wrongly suppose that it is reserved for the exclusive use of men, since it is resorted to almost en-since it is resorted to almost entirely by the sterner sex. This is the Magazine Room at the right of the Lower Hall. Women share equally in the privileges of this room, and a table is reserved for the use of women only, by way of encouragement. It is hoped that more of our women will find how restfull it is to spend a half-hour in the Magazine Room after a shopping trip down town.An event worthy of special attention is the publication, in one volume of the entire poetical works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. This is the Cambridge Edition. The workmanship of the volume is beyond criticism; the type is large and clear, and the cover iful in color and design.  the n-g- fellow's work, and co a biographical sketch by the editor, Mr. Horace E. Scudder. A thorough knowledge of Longfellow's verse is part of the education of every American, and the publication of his complete poetical works in one volume is a most practical effort in the popularization of the best literature.Harper's Magazine for March contains an interesting contribution entitled "The New England Negro," by Miss Jane DeForest Shelton. It treats of the time when slaves were owned extensively thoughoutthroughout Massachusetts and Connecticut, and the period immediately following their emancipation.Harper's also contains an article by Dr. T. Mitchell Prudden on "Tuberculosis and its Prevention." He makes some startling assertions in regard to the hereditary and contagious characteristics of consumption. His article will be found interesting to all who have reason to dread this disease.Many households in which there are no children, and in which, consequently, no child's publication is taken, deprive themselves of much valuable and interesting reading matter. It is surprising how much useful information is contained in these presumably children's perodicalsaperiodicals. For instance, even if one has outgrown the stories of the Youth's Companion, one can never be too old to enjoy the historical sketches, or the articles on the aspects and customs of other countries. The articles on the politics of the day are written in such a clear and concise style, that they are preferable to the reading of many newspapers. And the health article is worth ice of the paper.  Mr. Howells, now current in the Cosmopolitan, the same disgust at some of our institutions and customs, is  experienced that is felt after reading Bellamy's Looking Backward." It is a good thing to see ourselves as others see us" once in a while, even if it is in imagination only.MacMillan & Co. have recently published a new book by Mrs. Humphrey Ward, entitled "Marcella." If it contains the same strong delineation of character as does "Robert Elsmere," and "The History of David Grieve," we predict for it great popularity. Of Mrs. Ward's books, "David Grieve" has had the largest sale.Dictionaries small enough to be attached to the watch-chain are now being sold. They are enclosed in little silver cases, and are said to contain all the words in common use. This is multum in parvo indeed!"Negro Stars in All Ages;" is the title of a new book by W. H. Quick of North Carolina. The introduction is by Hon. W.P. Mabson of Texas.A recent issue of "The Texas Illuminator," a race paper published in San Antonio, Texas, contains a well written article urging NegoesNegroes to become share-holders in a new railroad now in process of construction in that state.Club women will find an interesting article in "Today," for March, by Miss Sherwood, entitled, "Women and Some Other Clubs in Washington."WOMEN AT HOMEElizabeth JohnsonEDITOR, ELIZABETH JOHNSON.Beginnings.With the beginning of spring comes, the feeling that many other things must be begun, and this season of looking forward possesses an anxiety fully deserving of the peacefulness of retrospection. The average housewife sees before her visions of innnmerableinnumerable things to be done before summer, and usually, even before ing the first contemplpalling di best suited to pression, must, before results can be achieved, be dispelled, and some sympathizing friend recommends a bottle of somebody's "Sarsaparilla" as the most efficient means of eradicating the ills that "flesh is heir to."Now, while the spring bitters of our grandmothers was undoubtedly productive of wonderful results in the way of physical renovation, the average patent medicine of to-day is from nature so far removed that only in extreme cases is benefit derived. Nature is, however, kind to us, and in taking her as she is we can test her powers. Few things are so beneficial to tired and nervous dispositions as a daily draught, one hour long, of pure air and sunshine; in other words, outdoor exercise is the spring necessity. Bright, balmy mornings are in themselves an invitation to enjoy them, and opening buds, birds and scenery furnish the needed diversion-the by-path where rests is found.Spring is a rather more favorable thus for the formation of walking clubs than fall, and an hour in the early morning say from six to seven, the most favorable time. Of course when breakfast must be prepared and household duties performed some later hour must be chosen--but the remedy has been prescribed--and the only other directions are, "Take regularly each day."Apropos of the early walk, a cheerful disposition is worth the cultivation. You have all heard of Dr. Joy's Golden Specific for "the blues"--the little couplet thoroughly digested--
Whenever you are feeling blue,Something for some one else go do."The blues," however, is now an obsolescent phrase, and, its cure hardly needs further comment.In a recent journal I noticed after a somewhat lengthy exegesis on "Nervousness in Girls," a good doctor's suggestion for its banishment. He said the only necessity was for the child to feel that it was loved. There are few ailments productive of so great suffering and so little sympathy as unstrung nerves. Naturally a girl looks for sympathy from her mother, and it is astonishing to think how few mothers understand how to give real sympathy that can be felt. They give their time, health and means oftentimes, and while the child is blessed with external luxuries all her cares and petty grievances are kept tto herself. There is but one thing necessary. Let the mothers remember that they once passed through the same experience, and that it means only a little self abnegation to put themthizing plane with their of repeated  housemaker are still looking in this direction for the evolution of the problem of domestic service.A scheme for cooperative laundry work has been talked about here and even if not carried out, the idea might serve for others. A lady who has a large and convenient laundry in her own home proposed to four or five friends that they send their laundry to her to be done by one laundress. This is a simple and practical scheme, one that can be carried out by any lady with a saving of time, fuel, money and annoyance.The number of women (and women who dress well and beautifully, too) who want the matter of dress simplified, grows every year. Women live too largely and broadly in this time, to be bound down to every change of sleeve or skirt, besides this, sensible women will not long consent to give up at the command of unknown rulers, fashions which are sensible and comfortable. Dressing well, is becoming a terrible burden to women of small means. Amateur dressmaking will not do nowadays, fashions are changing continuously and dressmakers charges are growing slowly but certainly upward. Does the worry and strain which all but the very rich are forced to endure to "keep up" pay in the results? It is to be hoped however, that whatever the future brings us, it will let us keep blouse waists, loose outside garments and short skirts. These all have the true beauty, the beauty of appropriativeness.CHATS WITH GIRLS.Leslie Wilmot
DEAR GIRLS: I am to have the privielegeprivilege of talking to you from time to time, and a blessed privilege, I esteem it; for in this woman's era, as Victor Hugo prophesied, woman has broken down nearly all barriers even in remote centres of the Old World's conservatism. She is attracting attention and winning respect for her abilities everywhere so that anything that tends to widen the horizon of our girls is of inestimable benefit. I may not be able to accomplish much in this great work but if one of suggestions should prove a fruitful scourcesource of help to even one girl I shall feel that I have not labored in vain.This time I want to say something to you about the reading habit. Every girl likes to read more or less but not many girls have a recognized plan of reading. Now, I do not mean by that that there should be any cast iron rule which every one, irrespective of her taste and temperament should follow. If you prefer Augusta Evans' "St Elmo," to Thackeray's Pendennis (I confess to a weak ness for that much abused book) have individuality enough to say so and pray for better taste--but much of the current literature in fiction aims only to amuse and some postivelypositively weakens andr future mpanion- nowledge rature, a  is always ennobling thoughts.It is not necessary for me to warn you against reading bad books for
"Immodest words admit of no defence,A want of decency is want of sense."The importance of reading the best books is self evident and perhaps Emerson's three rules may aid us in selecting the best. Frist.First. "Never read any but famed books. Second. Never read a book which is not a year old. Third. Never read anything you don't like."Three good rules but rather hard to reconcile unless the last pre-supposes each and every one to have perfect taste.A young girl came to me a few months ago with the remark, " I want to know all about the French Revolution and the first Napoleon and I find the books I am reading on the subject so dry that I can't get interested in them.""What you reading?" I inquired.She had looked up some main facts in text books, had tried to read a life of Napoleon by some unknown author and had begun Carlyle's French Revolution."Now, my dear, " said I, "it is absolutely necessary to read Carlyle on the subject but if you find it tedious just put it aside for awhile and read something which will lead up to it." I introduced her to Clara Mundt's, historical novels of that period. They are not correct but they give many main facts, fine pictures of the manners of that time in an interesting way.I recommended Abbott's Life of Napoleon, a very narrative of the life of that great soldier; "The Tale of Two Cities " by Charles Dickens; " "The Life of Charlotte Corday " and others. A few weeks ago she told me that she had not only read Carlyle's French Revolution with absorbing interest, but various other works that I had never attempted, and her knowledge of those times was so far superior to mine that I have been adopting some of the suggestions in my own cousecourse of reading.She only needed to have her mind awakened to the beauties of great works to appreciate them.Next month, I hope to tell you of a reading class of which I am a member and what we are doing in that line.Yours, LESLIE WILMOT.SOCIAL NEWSIrene DeMortie and Marion RidleyIRENE DEMORTIE--MARION RIDLEY.
EDITORS.The WOMAN'S ERA extends Easter greeting to all its friends and subscribers.The coming Easter Reception at Berkeley Hall has awakened considerable interest. We hear that some very smart costumes are to be worn. The committee composed of Messrs. Geo. S. Glover, Joseph Lee, Edward E. Brown, J. H. Lewis, U. A. Ridley, W. H. Washington, and Chas. L. Smith, guarantee that all anticipations of a good time will be fully realized.Mrs. Belle Mitchell and her daughter Miss Bessie, who came up especially for the Grand Opera, were suddenly called home in the midst of the musical season, by the sad death of Mrs. Douglass of Now Bedford.Mrs. Edward B. Jourdain has moved to New Bedford.Invitations are out for an Easter party to be given under the auspices of the Cambridge Dancing Class. We need no further assurance that it will be an enjoyable affair, than the fact that it is given under the management of Mrs. G. W. Lewis and Miss F. M. Clary.Miss Annie Hemmings is expected home from Vassar, Friday to spend her Easter vacation.Miss Alice Smith of Newport, R. I., and Miss Bessie Mitchell of New Bedford are coming up for the Easter party.Dr. J. Francis Smith of New York intends spending one or two days in Boston at Easter.Mrs. Robert Terrell of Washington gave a very charming reception last week for Mrs. Joseph Lee of Auburndale, who is paying Washington a short visit.Miss Nina Pinchback, the daughter of ex-Gov. P. B. S. Pinchback, now residing in Washington, is to be married to Col. Toomey of Baltimore on Thursday March 29th. The wedding, is to be private, but a reception is to be given to the bride and groom.It is whispered in and around Washington, that one of its sweetest and most popular young ladies, who by the way is a school teacher, has recently become engaged to a prosperous young druggist.Engagements and weddings seem to be quite the order of the day; and June seems to be the favored month for the consummation of plighted troths.It is rumored that another Washington lady is to wed a promientprominent Boston lawyer in June.Mr. Joseph Douglass, violiniut, is in town for a short time.New York is not behind Washington or Boston in this respect. The engagement is announced of Miss Emily Ray, cousin of Mrs. O. M. Waller to Mr. Frank P. Downing.We also hear of two engagements from Philadelphia: that of Miss Bessie Abele to Mr. Frank Cook of Washington, and her sister Miss Dottie Abele to Mr. Charles Cook.By the way, a number of very recherche teas have been given during the winter by a club of Boston's society girls, composed of Misses Georgine Glover, Annie Hare, Maud Cuney, Libbie Watson, Louisa Lewis and Lillian A. Lewis. Thus far, they have been entertained by Misses Maud Cuney, Libbie Watson and Georgine Glover.Miss Lillian A. Lewis, of the Boston Herald, has moved from Westminister to Myrtle Street.Mr. J. Percy Bond, after having enjoyed town life for five or six years, is now living with his father at Readville.Mr. W. Appo Johnson and Mr. Charles Richardson have moved from the Back Bay to the West End and are now at 11 Myrtle street.One of Boston's popular young men whom the girls have dubbed "Lord Chumley" met with a little experience not long ago, which would have resulted rather disastrously to the perpetrators of the joke, had not the gentleman in question been of an even and tranquil temperament. "Lord Chumley" who prides -himself on his exumberantexuberant growth of hair, which by the way was quite becoming, was waylaid by several of his fun-loving friends the other night, and one side of head shorn of its glossy ringlets. This tragedy was enacted in a well known gentleman's furnishing store on Dartmouth street, and the victim was firmly held in a chair by several of his friends while another deprived him of his curls despite his entreaties, struggles and threats of revenge. He is now consoling himself with the thought that it will see grow out, again, as everything comes to him who waits.Mme. Sisseretta Jones, who sang for Mme Melda at the latter's rooms in the Hotel Savoy, New York, is going to Paris to complete her musical education. This was brought about by the advice of Mme Melba who offered to sing at a benefit to defray the expenses of a course of study in Paris.Miss Ednorah Nahar is spending a few weeks in Boston. She contemplates going abroad in the Fall.Mr. J. C. Benjamin of Norwich, is confined to his house by illness.A Japanese Tea, for the benefit of St. Monica's Home for Sick Colored Women, is is to be given Easter Tuesday night in the Guild Room of the Advent. The cause is a most worthy one, and should be well attended.Rev. O. M. Waller, rector of St. Thomas', Philadelphia, and former assistant rector of St. Phillips P. E. ChuchChurch, New York, assisted in services at the latter church, Bishop Potter officiated.Mr. Oscar L. Mithell is to be ordained shortly at St. Augustine's. He is at attending the ThelogicalTheological School at Cambridge.At the last confirmation at Trinity Church a new and beautiful feature introduced was the giving of flowers with the confirmation certificate to each candidate. The beautiful font was filled with long-stemmed Catherine Mermet roses which, after the services were over Dr. Donald distributed to each of his new members. Mrs. J. H. Lewis, her young daughter, Mary, and her sister, Miss Melvin were members of the large class confirmed.The amateur theatricals which were to be given during the Easter holidays are postponed to allow "center-rush" Lewis of the Harvard foot-ball team, one of the actors, time to have his nose mended. Mr. Lewis came from Amherst to Harvard covered with honors won on both athletic and intellectual fields there, and will always carry some of the distinguishing marks of a successful college career--in the athletic department. Fortunately his intelectualintellectual gifts and splendid voice have made him as fine an orator as athlete.The next annual convention of the National American Woman Suffrage Association will be held in Atlanta, Ga. This is a departure and proceedings will be watched with interest. Miss Ida B. Wells speaks of it and of an incident connected with the recent convention at Washington as follows:Of course the colored woman suffragist won't be in it at all in that prejudiced town, it's bad enough in Washington, but ttheethere they can speak out in meeting and rsitnsit in the body of the hall with other deleigaesdelegates. But colored Washington is agog over treatment accorded Mrs. A. J. Cooper last week. She was sent as a committee of one to invite Rev. Anna Shaw to address the Colored Woman's League. This lady was at the Riggs House and Mrs. Cooper went to the elevator to go up to the ladies' room; the elevator boy refused to allow her to enter, stating that orders had been given to permit no colored person to go up in the elevators. Mrs. Cooper sent Rev. Shaw a note explaining the situation and that lady came flying down to see her, expressing her righteous indignation, but that did not change the rules of the house. To a Chicagoan (?) the whole thing is such a ridiculous farce. Mrs. Cooper had, less than a year ago been thrown out of a waiting room in North Carolina, but one doesn't always expect such things under the dome of the Capitol.MUSIC--DRAMA.Dr. Dvorak, one of the greatest of living composers, and the head of the National Conservatory of America in New York, is so enthusiastic about the future of the Negro in music that in addition to having composed a symphony entitled The "New World," founded on negro melodies, he has organized a class of colored students in vocal music.This class has been a pleasant surprise to him, as it has developed some excellent voices, and Dr. DovarakDvorak has declared that colored people will produce great singers in the future.A free scholarship is offered to young colored musicians of exceptional talent by the National Conservatory of America, and wherever abides budding talent of more than ordinary promise there is an eligible candidate and an application for free tuition should be made.The Grand Opera has come and gone, leaving in its train delightful memories of enchanting music rendered by such artists as Melba, Calve, Nordica, Eames, chalchi, the Des Reakes, Plancon, La-lle and De Lucia.Madam Melba steadily grew in favor with the Bostonians who although enthusiastic over her from the first were wildly demonstrative over her before the season ended.Madam Melba received over twenty recalls in her final appearance in "Faust," and her admirers were only satisfied when she rendered "Home, Sweet Home" with all the simplicity of greatness.Miss Laura Robeason, of St. Paul, Minn., Miss Hattie Dabney, of Richmond, Va., and Miss Florence Johnson, of Brooklyn, N. Y., are among the students now persuingpursuing courses in music in Boston. Miss Boberson is at the Boston Training School of Music, and will graduate this year. Misses Cuney and Johnson are at the N. E. Conservatory, and Miss Dabney is a pupil of Mr. Samuel Jamieson.The next concert of the Wage Earners series by the St. Cecilia will take place the first part of May in Music Hall.The program will he made up of miscellaneous numbers which are always popular. The price of tickets are 15 and 25 cents. Tickets may be obtained by applying or sending mail order with cash to the Musical Department of this paper not later than ten days previous to the concert.At a recent meeting  of the Woman's Era Club, Miss Eliza Gardener was unanimously elected to the position of chaplain.WOMEN IN BUSINESS.Our Boston women are well represented in many of the numerous avenues now open to women; we have a fairly good number of public school teachers, several professional singers and teachers of music, a small army of type-writers, a few newspaper women, besides book keepers, sales girls, compositors, dress makers manicurists and hairdresses.The number of young people who choose music for a specialty is quite marked. When are we to reckon among us artists, architects and designers ? The two latter fields seem to be entirely untried with the necessary number of girls who have leisure and means to make a choice of professions, it is strange that none have been led in this way.It is a recognized fact now that women should indulge and pursue special bent or cultivate a peculiar power as do the men. We now have conspicuous examples of rich women who finding themselves possessed of certain abilities have felt justified in exercising those traits for money returns. Mrs. Montgomery Sears accepts orders for portrait painting. Mrs. Apthrop superintends the decorating and furnishing of interiors.Such women have been severlyseverely criticised for entering the field against poor women but why should not everyone have the privilege of working? and why should we condemn a rich woman the industry that we commend in rich men?This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.BOSTON TRAINING SCHOOL OF MUSIC.Special Object:THE TRAINING OF TEACHERS OF MUSIC.--INSTRUCTION IN--Voice Culture, Piano, Organ, Violin, Guitar, Mandolin, Etc. 
Orchestral Instruments, Theory and Composition.MUSIC HALL BUILDING, BOSTON, MASS.AdvertisementsMUSICAL INSTRUCTIONJULY AND AUGUST.Summer School of Music--IN THE--MARTHA'S VINEYARDSUMMER INSTITUTE,COTTAGE CITY, MASS.Four hundred to seven hundred students, each season. Lessons in Piano, (practice Clavier Method), Singing, Harmony, Counterpoint and Musical Composition.Regular course in Literature, Science and Art.A strong Faculty of Eminent Teachers.Address,
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M.,
Director, Boston Training School of Music,
20 MUSIC HALL BUILDING, 
BOSTON, MASS.STORY.Eva LewisA DOMESTIC SCENE.EVA LEWIS.The smallest event can sometimes jar the domestic peace and produce discords so that weeks and even months fail to restore the usual harmony in many households.In this case the wind was to blame, not Mr. Brougham not Miss Myrtle but the wind. What business had it to blow so violently? It was but natural that Mr. Brougham having a cold should draw out that handkerchief, and how could Miss Myrtle's plants get air if she did not open the dining room window.So at ten minutes past eight, Mr. Brougham, passing Miss Myrtle's cottage, drew out his hankerchief, as we have said before; of cousrecourse he should have been more careful for that very morning, Mrs. Brougham had given him the handkerchief with his initials worked with her own hair, it being the anniversary of their wedding day. Though Mr. Brougham, who was never romantic and whom six years of married life had rendered less so would have preferred something more substantial, still he had thanked Mrs. Brougham and was now about to use, well, he was just taking the handkerchief from his left breast pocket, (to please Mrs. B, he had put it in his left breast pocket, although he had much rather put his cigar there because it would be handy, but as the pocket in question was right over his heart and as it was the anniversary of his wedding day, it became him to discommode himself a little, at least until he was out of sight). But we must go back to the wind. This mischievous, naughty wind seeing the handkerchief in Mr. Brougham's hand and Miss Myrtle's window open thought what fun it would be to snatch the article from its owner's hand and waft it into the window. Oh, what a mischievous wind it was! No sooner thought than done and a second later, Mr. Brougham stood looking thoughtfully in every direction while the handkerchief lay thoughtlessly on the dining room floor."Great Powers! what a wind," said Mr. Brougham I must confess that he used a much stronger term, but I am not versed in the orthography of it. Mr. BronghamBrougham buttoned up his coat and continued his walk, and his nephew, who lived opposite and was observing him, nearly died of laughter as he afterwards said. Not contented with the mischief it had already wrought, the wind broke off a beaut ulbeautiful calla lily. Now when Miss Myrtle entered the room the first thing she saw was the lily. "O, my beautiful calla!" she exclaimed, "Could the cat have done it?" "Puss, puss," she called but no cat appeared. Then she spied the handkerchief. "It is not mine. I wonder where it came from," she murmured. And then she said, "Oh, the wind most likely." Tossing the handkerchief on the table, she closed the window.At half past ten, precisely, Mrs. Grant stepped in to see Miss Myrtle. Now, Mrs. Grant had two faults--she loved to talk and she always saw the worst side of human nature. After telling Miss Myrtle that she could not take off her bonnet;  that she had only dropped in to borrow some knitting needles; that her plum preserves were probably boiling over on the stove at home; that Tom Crane had cut his hand; that Lena Smith was flirting dreadfully with the Baptist minister; that Samuel Cole's son had been robbing the Skimps' orchard and would surely be hung some day, and that if he were her boy she would manage him better, she rose to depart and as she neared the door saw the handkerchief. Now; Mrs. Grant had been at Mrs. Brougham's the eveingevening before, admiring the same handkerchief and then Mrs. Brougham's hair had a peculiar color. When she was young, her admirers called it auburn, golden and other names, but her brothers (who tell the truth like relatives?) said that Maria had the queerest kind of red hair that they had ever seen.At any rate, Mrs. Grant saw the hankerchief and recognized it at once. Hurrying home, she rescued her plum preserves from instant destruction and putting her dinner on, started for Mrs. Brougham's. She ran into the house all out of breath. "Why, what is the matter?" inquired Mrs. Brougham."Now, Maria Brougham, you and I have been friends so long that I think it would come better from me than a stranger," cried Mrs. Grant, which considering that they had always quarrelled when schoolgirls, and had been rivals in most things ever since, this friendship seemed remarkable.That this speech foreshadowed some bad news to herself Mrs. Brougham, well knew."What is it?" she asked impatiently."I would say nothing about it but I think you really ought to know,"Know what?" demanded Mrs. Brougham in a sharp tone."Well my dear, don't get angry. Every one has trials though I did think this would be spared you. Men will be men and even poor Grant in his lifetime--""Is it anything about Mr. Brougham ? " inquired his wife.About him! Well, you see as I was saying that we can't expect men--""Sarah Grant, tell me what you have to say or hold your peace," screamed Mrs. Brougham.You need not be so high and mighty about it," answered her tormentor. I saw that handkerchief you showed me last night in Miss Myrtle's house this morning, and they do say that he prefers Miss Myrtle to his own wife.""Who says so?" demendeddemanded Mrs. Brougham."Everybody, but I never believed it until now. ""I don't believe it!" said Mrs. Brougham."Not believe it! You might as well tell me I am lying," screamed Mrs. Brougham."I mean, perhaps, you are mistaken," cried poor Mrs. Brougham, who felt no desire to quarrel at that moment."Mistaken! I would know Your hair anywhere, " repledreplied Mrs. Grant, preparing to take her departure.(To be continued.)In our next, we will begin a series of papers on Physical Culture and its relation to Beauty by Miss Mary P. Evans, director of Physical Training in the public schools of Washington, D. C.All the club women you know will want the WOMEN'S ERA. Get their subscription and obtain one of our premiums.NOTES ON THE CARNIVAL.The preparation for the Spring Carnival to be held by the WOMAN'S ERA Club the week beginning April 9th, are going forward with enthusiasm and there is every promise for success. The proceeds will go towards the Building Fund of the club.There will be many novel and interesting features. A reception to the ministers will occupy the first afternoon and evening. A rosebud tea, a spelling-match, a children's carnival with music and dancing will be subsequent features.The Domestic Science Committee, Mrs. Hattie Ruffin chairman, will have charge of the cafe. This promises well and many dainties will be served at reasonable rates.In connection with the cafe there will be a table for the sale of icles, cakes, preserves, pies, crackers, etc. Cooking utensils and groceries will also be on sale here.The Ways and Means Committee, Mrs. Benjamin chairman, will have the Art Gallery and Fishing Pond. The Race Committee, Mrs. Mary Howard chairman, will present Mrs. Jarley's waxwork. The committee on Philanthropy, Mrs. Foster chairman, will conduct the candy table. The TemperenceTemperance Committee, Mrs. A. G. Brown, chairman, will have charge of the apron table. Mrs. Ransom will be in charge of the tissue paper table. The Literary Committee will sell newspapers under the charge of Miss Medora Gould, chairman, and the Current Topics Committee, Miss Elizabeth Johnson, chairman, will conduct a Shakesperian tea. Mrs. Thomas Taylor will make and sell cold beverages and Miss Lizzie Stewart hot beverages.On Children's Day, the floor will be reserved for children under fifteen. There will be good music and many novel features especially interesting to children.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ATLANTA, GA.REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D. D., President.This Institute trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedmen of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions formfrom those who are willing to help toward their education. Write to the President.CURRENT MENTION.The eloquent extempore speech made by Mr. Geo. T. Downing at the meeting held by the colonization society in Boston recently, has not received the notice it deserved. All the weight which Bishop Potter's utterances carry was quickly overcome by Mr. Downing who created the only enthusiasm if the meeting. Bishop Potter is not alone in thinking that colored people owe it to their self respect to "go back to Africa" and leave a country where they are not wanted. A colored lady of refinement and education who has not only a family here (small to be sure) but an ancestral home in America had these words addressed to her recently by an ignorant woman who twenty years ago came over on an emigrant ship, "you colored folks ought to go back to Africa where you belong, we don't want you here anyway"! Mr. Downing is not the only colored man who thinks there is a call for him to stay in hehis native land and help civilize it. isMomolu Massaqui, the Prince of the Vie country, West Africa, who represented his native land at the World's Fair at Chicago last summer, is now giving his lectures and showing the products and the manufactures of his country in and around Boston.This young man is a most satisfactory specimen of his race, refined in manner, cultivated in speech, with natural gifts, that contribute towards making him all instructive and interesting lecturer.Mrs. Mary Jones, a well-to-do colored lady residing in Lexington, Ky., recently died, and among the items of her will is one bequeathing $1,000 to Lieutenant Governor M. C. Alford, of Kentucky in recognition of kindness shown to her.Club Gossip.In January the Woman's Era Club passed the following resolution endorsing President Cleveland's position on the Hawaiian question:--We, members of the Woman's Era Club, feeling that all expression of opinion upon the Hawaiian question is especially fitting from us as colored women and Americans, do hereby Resolve:--1st, That we heartily commend the moral courage and independence exhibited in the attitude of the President of the United States upon this question.2nd, That irrespective of party affiliation we condemn those journals which blinded by prejudice and political feeling have sought to brand as unpatriotic the position of those who place truth and justice above national gain and power.3rd, We also condemn those American citizens, who, having found in Hawaii wealth, health and homes, and who having grown greedy with all these have sought to obtain the country itself, now seek to excuse their rapacity by traducing the queen and the people who made possible this prosperity.The meeting of the Mass. State Federation of Woman's Clubs held in Boston March 8, was rich in the discussion of subjects of interest to all club women--among the subjects which might serve also as topics for discussion in other organization were these "Which is now helpful to the individual club woman, a course of study or the discussion of general topics? and "What is the desirable limit of clubs and under what circumstances should membership be indefinitely extended?"Read our advertisements.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.Do you want to own your own home?
Then, read this.IF YOU WANT TO BUY A HOUSE IN CAMBRIDGE, SOMERVILLE, DORCHESTER OR EVERETT, IT WILL PAY YOU TO CALL ONBALDWIN & DORSEY,REAL ESTATEMORTGAGE & INSURANCE BROKERS,They make a a specialty of property in the Suburbs.
They furnish purchase money at low rates of interest.
They will lend you money to build a house on your own land.STOP! PAY NO MORE RENT. BEGIN NOW TO BUY YOUR OWN HOME.>BALDWIN & DORSEY,
REAL ESTATE, MORTGAGES AND INSURANCE,
555 MAIN ST., - - - CAMBRIDGEPORT.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY OF BOSTON,Street Railway Builders &  Contractors for Public Works,Estimates made for a complete Underground System.34 SCHOOL STREET, BOSTON. GEO. S. BARNES, PRESIDENT.
STANLEY RUFFIN, SEC'Y & TREASThe Treasurer has met with very gratifying success in floating bonds and stock of the Eastern Construction Co. of Boston in spite of the depressed times. The small investors know a good thing and are quick to take advantage of an opportunity like this.F. S. BUTLER,
PRACTICAL TAILOR
ROOM 4, 84 MASON ST., BOSTON.
Ladies and Gents Clothing Cleansed, Dyed,
Repaired and Altered.MISS R. A. SMITH,
Fashionable Dressmaker,
Orders Promptly Executed and all Work
Guaranteed.
37 ANDERSON STREET, BOSTON.For Dry Goods go to--SHAPIRO'S
132 Cambridge Street, Boston.Money saved by dealing with 
CORLISS & SIMPSON, Provisions, 
132 Cambridge Street, Boston, Mass.BUY PROVISIONS OF
FRANK M. KIMBALL,
192 & 194 Cambridge Street, Boston.MISS G. H. WILLIAMS, 
BUSINESS ADVISER.
Hours for consultation, 4 p. m. to 9 p. m.
48 Charles Street, Boston.FREDERIC H. LEWIS,
Undertaker & Funeral Director,
132 Charles St., Boston.The Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 2.BOSTON, MASS.,TUESDAY, MAY 1, 1894. PRICE 10 CENTS.THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the Woman's Era Club, and devoted to the Interests of the women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country.Published monthly, in Boston, by JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, Editors and Publishers.SPECIAL CONTRIBUTORS.Medora W. Gould    Leslie WilmotMarion Ridley      Irene DeMortieHannah Smith       M. Elizabeth Johnson.Entered at the Boston, Mass., Post Office as Second Class Mail Matter,SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Rates to Clubs, One Hundred Copies,   -    7.00Checks, drafts audand post-office orders should be made payable to the Woman's Era. All communications should be addressed to"THE WOMAN'S ERA,"
185-187 CammbridgeCambridge Street.MRS. WM. E. MATTHEWS  (VICTORIA EARLE.)S. Elizabeth Frazier
            
            We read daily of the progress women are making for the elevation of their sex and we are proudsproud to note noble examples among us, who follow in their train, laboring earnestly yet modestly for their sex and the upbuilding of the race. Surely we cannot know too much of their genius and merits, for the inspiration of our girls.Among our prominent progressive women is Mrs. William E. Matthews, known in the literary world as "Victoria Earle."Mrs. Matthews, so desirous of doing what she can for her race, with a few others saw the practical need, of banding together well-thinking women with the hope that they might in their generation pave the way for the success of the futurity of the race, and organized The Woman's Loyal Union. We are favored to exist in the seed planting time.Mrs. Matthews has been the president of the Woman's Loyal Union since its organization.Its members have found her loyal, unswerving embracing every opportunity for the accomplishment of the aims of the Union.Realizing the wrongs perpetrated upon our race in the South, the injury occasioned by opinions that have been freely expressed in several leading magazines and newspapers, as to the retrogression of the race morally, Mrs. Matthews has been exeeedinglyexceedingly anxious to ascertain the truth of such statements.With this idea in view she wrote a set of questions, submitted them to the executive board of the Union with the hope of their approval, and expressed the desire to have said questions sent to the ministers, school teachers and other representative men and women throughout the country for the purpose of eliciting from them the true statistics of our people morally.The idea is bright, progressive. We, co-workers, appreciate her efforts, her executive ability, and shall ever give her our hearty support."Her great fondness for research and her splendid memory make her quite an authority on literature, art, history and philosophy. Her historical researches have led her to the determination to write a series of text books, historical primers for the youth, of the race, which will trace the history of the African and show that he and his descendants have been prominently identified with every phase of this country's history including the landing of Columbus.She has also a number of stories and a play which is yet unpublished.When all these shall have been given to the public, race literature will be enriched and the name of Victoria Earle become a household word."S. ELIZABETH FRAZIER,141 West 17th street, New York City.This month our title page has a cut and sketch of Mrs. W. E. Mathews, (iVctoriaVictoria Earle) president of the Women's Loyal Union of New York and Brooklyn. As well know as is Mrs. Mathews, her face and history are comparatively new to people of this section who will be delighted with this opportunity to make a closer acquantanceacquaintance with this distinguished lady.Our readers who need to have any tailoring work done are urged to patronize Miss Butler, 84 Mason st. Boston.See Ad.CHICAGO LETTER.R.E. MooreThe "Tourgee Club" composed of leading men of Chicago, upon organization set aside every Thursday afternoon from 1 to 5, as "Ladies Day." For some reason the ladies did not make use of these afternoons and the gentlemen desiring to make the day popular invited several women to read papers on Ladies' Day.Mrs. Stephen Matthews of London, England was announced to speak on Dec. 14, 1893 on "Ideal Womanhood." This was the first address. The parlors were crowded and those present were entertained for two hours on the subject. At the close of the address Miss Ida B. Wells who introduced Mrs. Matthews extended the invitation from the Tourgee Club to the ladies to meet every Thursday and make use of the parlors in any manner they desired. The ladies decided to meet the following Thursday and also to invite Mr. W. T. Stead, editor of the Review of Reviews of London to address them.Dec. 21st, 2 p. m., fifty ladies assembled in the parlors and after some delightful music, Mr. Stead was introduced and he made an informal talk on "Friendship between the Sexes." A general discussion followed.On Dec. 28th Miss Ida B. Wells gave a history of Clubs among Colored Women," and on Jan. 4th presentadpresented a paper on "Colored Woman's Work."These series of meetings were so largely attended and created such an interest among the ladies that they decided to formally organize under the name of the "Woman's Club." ThitThat was done on Jan. 11th. On March 29th a constitution was adopted- The object of the club is the elevation and protection of women and the home, and much good work has been accomplished since their organization. The membership is nearly two hundred and the meetings are largely attended every Thursday afternoon in the parlors of the Tourgee Club House, 2926 Dearborn street.The present officers are Mrs. R. R. Moore, president, Miss Ida B. Wells, vice president, Alice Harvey, secretary.Later, Mrs. Moore, president of the Woman's Club writes as follows.At present we have two very interesting cases on hand; we are prosecuting the policeman who killed the husdandhusband of Alice Adams a hard working young colored woman, with two little children. We have paid all her expenses in the trial, and the officer is bound over to the crimimalcriminal court, $5000 bond. We have secured four nice, comfortable rooms for the widow, furnished them and paid two months rent in advance. All of this we have done without a treasury as we charge no fee in our club; we have two hundred members in our club and whenever money is required the ladies respond cheerfully.The second case is that of a girl of fourteen, friendless and homeless, who has reached such a pitch of desperation, that she was found carrying a revolver, living in hovels and associating with the most degraded. We have decided to take her under complete charge of the Woman's Club, send her to school until she is eighteen, educate and endeavor to train her to become a useful member of society We have numbers of other cases awaiting our attention.R.E. Moore,President of the Woman's Club.KANSAS CITY LETTERJ.Silone YatesThe Kansas City League fittingly celebrated the first anniversary of its existence during the first week of March.The exercises were of a public nature and the annual reports were listened to with much interest. Excellent addresses were delivered by reverend Marshall of St. Augustine's Episcopal Mission and Bishop Handy of the A. M. E Church. Cheering letters were read from the leagues of Washington, Boston, and Lawrence.During the past year, fifteen young people were in various ways assisted to help themselves, and it is hoped that much more may be accomplished in 94-'5.A course of lectures upon practical subjects is now in progress and judging from the first lecture of the course this will become one of the effective methods of exerting a wholesome educational influence in the community. "The Improvement of Home," by Miss Anna H. Jones was the subject of the lecture already given, and it awakened much interest in an appreciative audience.The other, lecturers named for this course are as follows.--Prof. G. N. Grisham, Lawyer T. R. Subletts, Mrs. Frances Jackson of the American Citizen, Prof. J. U. Daniel of Lincoln High School.J. Silone Yates, president.SIERRA LEONE CLUB.Mrs. Annie King and Mrs. S.H. JohnsonThe Sierra Leone Club was organized Feb. 7th, 1892, by twelve active and energetic women, who felt the need of a closer union and broader development. Its object is the intellectual and social improvement of its members We represent the "queens of the fireside," as all of us are wives and almost all mothers. Naturally our attention was at first given to home training and domestic economy. Papers were read and discussed and useful and beneficial suggestions were adopted by us. This, together with "Current Topic Talks," comprised the first year's work. Each lady felt herself so much benefited that it was thought best to double our number, therefore, twelve more ladies were invited to associate with us and we formed an institute and successfully carried out a plan of study last year, in which we succeeded fairly well. The knowledge we gained made a generous impression upon us, and it was concluded that if we could help ourselves in short talks and a few hours' study each day, that much good could be accomplished if we founded an industrial school for our women and children. On the first Tuesday in January 1894 we adopted resolutions to the effect that we would use every effort this year to get means to purchase a lot and erect a cottage for the salvation of our girls. We are moving along nicely with twenty-four willing workers and twelve who are friendly to our cause. WE hope to have $500 by next January and a home. Already we have been encouraged by the results of the entertainments. We have just begun on industrial work this month. We instituted a lecture course and the presidents of the W. C. T. U. and Equal Suf-

frage Club were the first to talk for us. Several of our educated men and women have been invited to talk upon the various subjects of religion, politics and education. From time to time we will be pleased to inform sister clubs through the ERA, of our success.MRS. ANNIE KING, presidentMRS. S. H. JOHNSON cor. sect.New England Women's Club.Florence EverettI am happy to say that the Directors of the N.E.W. Club voted to subscribe for the WOMAN'S ERA, and wish me to express to you their interest in the movement of which it is the organ, and cordial good wishes for its success. There is not much in this Club that would serve as news, or perhaps be of very general interest, as the meetings are held every Monday afternoon from November to June, when a lecture is given, followed by discussion; but our secretary, Miss Lucia M. Peabody, will be very glad to respond, if at any time there should be any special points you would like to know about.There is another matter I should speak of; about a year ago the Massachusetts State Federation of Women's Clubs was formed with Mrs. Julia Ward Howe President. Twenty-six Clubs have already joined, and we hope nin time it will be a union of all the Women's Clubs in the State If at any time, your Club or any that you may know about should like to join, we shall be most happy to welcome them. We feel sure this is going to be very helpful and inspiring to all the Clubs, for meetings are held for the discussion of Club .methods and subjects of general interest, and as the members of the various Clubs meet, and know each other better, all will be helped, and by uniting in this way, they will become more and more a power in the State.FLORENCE EVERETT.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.MISS G. H. WILLIAMS,
BUSINESS ADVISER,Hours for consultation, 4 p. m. to 9 p.m.
48 Charles Street, Boston.BUTLER R. WILSON.
ATTORNEY AT LAW
34 School Street, Boston.FREDERIC H. LEWIS,
Undertaker & Funeral Director,
132 Charles St., Boston.D.A. NEWCOMB & SON
DEALERS IN FRESH, SALT AND SMOKED
FISH.
Fresh-opened Oysters and Clams.
194 CAMBRIDGE ST., BOSTON MASS.
Orders called for and delivered promptly.THE AMERICAN WRINGER CO.
BRANCH STORE.
13 & 15 Broadway Extension,
near Washington St.
BOSTON, MASS,
C. C. BUCKLEY, Manager.
MANUFACTURER OF
CLOTHES-WRINGERS.All kinds of Wringers and Sweepers Repaired
Orders by Mall Promptly Attended To.Boston.THE WOMAN'S ERA CLUB.Club Motto-"Help to make the world better."This club has just closed a carnival which, considering the hindrances in the shape of continued bad weather counter attractions, etc., was very successful. Of the four afternoons and evenings during which it was held, there was only one evening when the weather was pleasant, for the rest although the beautiful little hall was elaborately decorated and the cafe stocked with "good things" to eat, the rain snow and sleet were the obstacles which prevented the public from enjoying these features in large numbers. In spite of the storm, however, Children's Day found the hall well filled with happy youngsters and admiring parents. Those who braved the storm were amply repaid, for there are few prettier sights than that of children dancing.Some of the features of the Carnival was the sale of home-made bread, pies and cakes, of household articles and implements, delicious home-made tonics, hot chocolate and the exquisite cups in which it was served. Besides these there were the usual features in tables for aprons, flowers, fancy goods and an especially attractive tissue paper table. No pains were spared to make the carnival a great success and had the weather been favorable the sum cleared above the great expense would have been much larger.Other leagues may find in this rather detailed account some suggestions which may be used to their advantage.The club meets bi-monthly, the first meeting each month being devoted to business, the next six meetings are arranged, the literature, the temperance, and the civics committee will each provide for a meeting with appropriate speakers.SHALL WE HAVE A CONVENTION OF THE COLORED WOMEN'S CLUBS, LEAGUES AND SOCIETIES?J. Silone YatesWhat Prominent Women have to sayThe WOMEN'S ERA believes that the time is ripe for a convention of the colored women of the country to agitate thesubjectthe subject. It proposes to publish the views of influential women on the subject.The letters below are in answer to the following questions.I. Do you favor a convention of the colored women's clubs, eaguesleagues and societies?2. What in your opinion is the most available place and time for such a congress?3. State why you do or do not favor a convention.Organization or military advance is the first step in nation making, the first step in any progessiveprogressive movement; hence we hail with delight the growth of the club movement among colored women. It is a sign of mental activity and should be conducted with well defined aims and from broad platforms.How can these aims be properly defined, discuseeddiscussed and incorporated into a general organization which shall reach the hearts of the race, east, west, north and south, unless it is brought about by calling a congress of women of nobility of soul and of wide experience in practical affairs?By all means let us have a congress of colored women at some time in the near future to give solidity, unity of purpose, national character, and other requisites of success necessary to a movement so broad and far reaching as a race organization should be.As to the place of meeting, we favor Chicago because of its central location.Organization of the kind suited to our present needs should be national to be effective; should be national to develop harmony of ideas and unity of purpose.The W.C.T.U. owes its value to its national character, to its thorough system of organization, to its clearly defined purposes. The same may be said of the chautauqua Circle, of the Christian Endeavor Society, and numerous other examples which might be given to illustrate the point in question,  J. SILONE YATES,Pres. Woman's LeagueIn answer to your question regarding the holding of a congress of the colored women's leagues I heartily approve of the suggestion. I am of the opinion that great good would result from an interchange of ideas as to how we could best accomplish the more lasting results of the Work each league is engaged in. By understanding the object of each league's work, I believe we could so harmonize our efforts that it might be uniform throughout the country and much good result therefrom. To the second question I beg to reply in favor of Chicago as the place and the month of August as the time for holding the Congress. You will pardon me for naming Chicago, however, I am convinced there is not another place in the United States that affords its good facilities for the meeting as the great convention city of America. We have a Woman's Club here with a membership of more than 200 ladies all enthusiastic in all matters pertaining to the elevation of woman and the good of the race in general. The scope Of our work is unlimited, and it would afford us great pleasure to have the opportunity of greeting and entertaining the noble women of our race in the first grand congress of colored women.I think the ladies would gain inspiration by breathing the free air, and mingling with the broadminded women of Chicago. If our city is elected I think we will be able to give evidence of our appreciation of the honor. Trusting that my humble opinion may in it measure harmonize with the grand idea advanced by you, I amYours fraternally,R.E. Moore.Pres "Woman's Club,"Chicago Ill.I like the idea of a Congress of the Colored Womens' Leagues and clubs. I favor it to such extent that I would urge it among our women. My experience in association work hardly entities me to offer a suggestion as to the time and place of such a convention. I really think with the Women's Era in its opinion.Concerning the Washington League under Mrs. Cooper's splendid leadership, so far as I know at this time, the most general opinion is that Philadelphia is centrally located, thus convenient to all.August, in any judgment, is for several reasons the best time for holding conventions. I favor a Congress, first because I believe it would arouse the interest, and center the attention of our women in common, which will lead to not only an interest generally, but a deeply rooted local pride in the matter of organization and this practical support of the same. The interchange of the views of thoughtful women as to the needs of the home will prove not only instructive, in itself, but will lead to, or should lead to the general adoption of a broad plan or method of action, Organization among our women is, practically speaking in the experimental stage, to the average woman--conservative, refined educated woman--the formation of associations for the avowed purpose of the advancement of race interest, is handicapped by a certain lack of precedence and unfortunately enveloped in uncertainty as to method--so much so that there is a marked disposition among them to consider the movement as one embracing many difficulties, and are inclined to stand off and see to what degree of success the originators of the club movement will attain, prudence is to be commended always, but it is wise to consider the adage."In the absence of the best, the worst will prevail" and as the various organizations are permanently organized, it behovesbehooves those to whom light is given to think for the future, and assist in the matter of establishing a high standard, in the very beginning, a Congress would ventilate for good all such views--therefore if I have any voice at all I raise it to hope that the WOMEN'S ERA will agitate the matter. By all means let us have a congress.Sincerely yours,MRS. W.R. MATTHEWS,Pres. Woman's Loyal Union,New York.Just at this stage of the higher activity among colored women, I knew of nothing that would prove more stimulating than a congress of their clubs. Unfortunately the beginnings of their club work are still so unimportant to any but themselves that, the great medium of intercourse, the newspapers, does not bring them to acquaintance with each other. Little bands here and there are trying each in its own way, to lift those that can reach to a higher plain. But as yet the colored women workers are missing the sympathy, the encouragement, the larger wisdom that comes from intercourse with others who are pushing on towards the same ideal. If the WOMEN'S, ERA Had expired the first issue would yet have set the ball rolling toward what seems to me the next effective move for progression, the fellowship of Colored Women's Clubs, and Boston as the place. I choose Boston for the reason that I know of no other city where the attitude of the press and that of the general public would be as respectful; nor where the impressiveness of such a gathering would receive such recognition.May we have a congress with all its means of mental strengthening, to say nothing of the quickening influence of the hand-clasp, and a look into the faces of the women who are striving to realize the same ideals.MARIA L. BALDWIN,Vice Pres. Women's Era Club.CLUB GOSSIP.An interesting fact concerning the Chicago Club is that no membership fees are received; in spite of this, the club carries on work requiring money and has never yet been hampered for want of it.Miss Baldwin, one of the vice presidents of the WOMAN'S ERA is also a member of the celebrated Cantabrigia, which numbers nearly four hundred and includes in its membership all of the many distinguished ladies of Cambridge.Miss Baldwin has twice appeared before this club, the first time with a paper on, "The true hold of the poet on the people," this paper had the fine intellectual tone which charaterizescharacterizes everything Miss Baldwin writes, and was enthusiastically received by Cantabrigad.Providence R.I. has fallen into line and announces a new woman's club.-- The WOMAN'S ERA.Some of the topics for discussion at the Working Girls Convention to be held in Boston, May 9th, 10th, and 11th:What are clubs doing in developing the spiritual, and moral?Influence of clubs on the home and the neighborhood,Clubs in relation to the community.Relative advantages of large and small clubs.Club finances.Best methods of filling the treasury.Are too many women entering business?"Pin-money" workers.Massachusetts is to have a Woman's Club House for the use of all women's clubs.What Mrs. Jennie C. Croly says of the club movement generally is applicable to the movement among our women.Newspapers are just waking up to the importance of the woman's club movement, not only in the cities, but throughout the country, and the extent to which it is revolutionizing the social life everywhere, for men as well as for women. Heretofore an occasional paragraph was all the many newspapers thought fit to bestow upon a movement which marks a new departure in the life of women, and an enlargement in their mental horizon, such as it has never before known."As late as five years ago, before Sorosis held its first club convention, the woman's club was still isolated, as women had been. They knew not each other, their strength nor their weakness. They grew by simultaneous impluseimpulse, by heresayhearsay, by club women being transferred from one soil to another, and carrying with them the seeds of the plant that had flourished in the place whence they came. Within this brief time women's dubs have multiplied ten to one.The Richmond Charitable Union a large and flourishing society organized with the specific object of buying or building a home for Aged and infirm colored women of the city of Richmond, Va. is officered as follows: Mrs. N. M. Robinson, Pres.; Miss. P. R. Anderson, Sect.; Mrs. N. Wallace, Asst. Sect. Mrs. D. E. Moore, Tres.It is hoped for a fuller report of the good work being done by this vigoriousvigorous association for our next issue.The Woman's Era Club will hold a childrens' May Festival to be followed by a dance in the evening for the older people.The women of Norfolk and Berkeley, Va.; incited and encouraged by the published reports of the women's clubs are organizing and it is expected from the enthusiasm displayed that some of the most interesting letters in the future will be from that section.Miss Ednorah Nahar will give a childrens' cantata at Charles tSreetStreet Church on Tuesday the 29th of May.Our readers and club women will be interested in the letters from two more flourishing clubs that of the "Women's Club" of Chicago which numbers two hundred and which seems to be infused with the energy and enterprises characteristic of that city and the Sierra Leone Club of Lawrence, Kansas. This latter is comparatively small in membership but, has a reputation as a power for good far outside of its own neighborhood. The Chicago letter unfortunately came too late for our last number that, however, will not prevent it being read with interest in this issue.In the future THE WOMAN'S ERA will be supplied to clubs, leagues and societies at the rate seven cents a copy to be sold by them for ten cents.Only clubs taking one hundred copies will be entitled to an advertisement.Clubs are entitled to commission on subscription sent in their name. Letters from clubs for publication and financial returns must be made on or before the 18th of each month.Money should be made payable to THE WOMAN'S ERA and should be forwarded by registered letter, draft, check or post office order to the office, 185 Cambridge street, Boston, Mass.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.MADAME S.G. IRVINES.Fashionable Dressmaking Parlors,
KANSAS CITY,MO.ColroredColored Women's League.1027 Charlotte St.HENRY YOUNG.
CLOTHING CLEANED, DYED, AND REPAIRED, 
ALTERED AND PRESSED
NO. 9 CITY HALL AVE., BOSTON
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.E. M. ALLEN, TAILOR.Gent's Clothing Made, Altered, Cleansed 
and Repaired in the neatest manner, st
at short notice and on Reasonable terms. NO. 11 CITY HALL AVENUE Boston.EXCELLENT BOOKS 
For Every Family.Abraham Lincoln.
In the Series of American Statesmen. By JOHN T. MORSE, Jr. With a portrait and map, 2 vols. 16 mo, $2.50. Also, in library style, $2.50; half morocco, $5.00The Harvard Graduates' Magazine says : "As a Life of Lincoln, it has no competitors; as a political history of the Union side during the Civil War, it is the most comprehensive, and, in proportion to its range, the most compact."James Freeman Clarke.Autobiography, Diary and Correspondence, with a chapter on his Anti-slavery work by REV. SAMUEL MAY. Edited and supplemented by EDWARD EVERETT HALE, D. D. With a steel Portrait. Crown 8vo. $1.50.Rachel Stanwood.
By LUCY GIBBONS MORSE, author of "The Chezzles." $1.25
"A pretty romance runs side by side with anti-slavery fairs, the Hutchinson concerts, Wendell Phillips's eloquent speeches and the strong, quiet influence of Lydia Maria Child."--NEW YORK CHRISTIAN ADVOCATE.The Son of a Prophet.
By GEORGE ANSON JACKSON. 16 mo. $1.25.
"We do not hesitate to rank this story in respect to both interest and power with 'Ben Hur' and 'The Prince of India.'"--BOSTON CONGREGATIONALIST.o Heroes.
A Capital Story for Boys. By BLANCHE WILLIS HOWARD, author of "One Summer." "Guenn," etc. With illustrations attractively bound, 75 cents.Twenty Years at Sea.
By FREDERICK STANHOPE HILL .16 mo $1
"One of the most fascinating volume of the season. The first part relates tsto the merchant service, and the second to the author's experiences in the navy, where he served under Commodore Farragut, thus giving his reminiscences a peculiarly delightful interest."-BOSTON ADVERTISER.POLLY OLIVER'S PROBLEM
A Story of special interest to girls, but delightful to everybody. By Mrs. Wiggins. Illustrated, $1.00Mrs. Wiggins Other Books.
A Cathedral Courtship and Penelope's English Experiences. Illustrated $1.
The Birds' Christmas Carol. 50 cents.
The Story of Patsy. 60 cents.
A Summer in a Canon, $1.25.
Timothy's Guest; $1.00
The Story Hour-Short Stories. $1.00
Children's Rights. $1.00MRS. JANE G. AUSTIN
Old Colony Stories.Standish of Standish;
Betty Alden.
A Nameless Nobleman,
Dr. Le Baron and His Daughters.
David Alden's Daughter, and Other Stories of Colonial Times.Each 16mo., $1.25.Sold by all Book-sellers. Sent postpaid, by 
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN & Co.Domestic science. PAPER NO. 2. Ellen Bartelle DeitrickELLEN BARTELLE DEITRICK.The first lesson that science teaches in any department of the vast realm of wisdom is that we must begin with one thing, done thoroughly, and learn to labor long and wait patiently for even small fruition. An experiment in domestic science started, apparently, under the most highly favorable conditions, in CambrigeCambridge some years ago, came to utter grief and failure from lack of learinglearning this first lesson. The ambitious experimenters started a co-operative store for groceries, a co-operative bakery, and a co-operative laundry, all at the same time, and with no previous experience of such undertaking among their members. Naturally, their enterprises were soon wrecked upon the rocks of their own utter inexperience. And yet there is no reason in the world why any one of the three, adventured alone, might not have gone on to brilliant perpetuation. You are, possibly, all familiar with the history of the 28 poor weavers in England, who, just fifty years ago, clubbed together to buy their own tea and sugar at a wholesale shop in order to get a better quality at a less price than they could obtain at retail groceries. Each one saved a little out of his weekly wages until they jointly accumulated enoughtenough cash to buy one chest of tea and one hogshead of sugar. Then each one bought from this common stock, paying cash for it and giving the same price charged at the retail groceries. When they reckoned up account before re-investing they found they had made for themselves a handsome profit, in fact they had saved the profit they had formerly given to the corner grocer, and had also had a much better quality of tea and sugar. As the news spread, the enterprise grew; other laborers joined them; as their profits accumulated they began to buy other things in the same way, bread, wheat, and clothing then others, and still others, until to-day that society, called the Rochdale Pioneers, has become a vast concern carrying on a yearly business of much over a million dollars.The full history of the working of this wonderful enterprise is well worth careful study, for it is one of the most encouraging recitals of what may be accomplisedaccomplished from humble beginnings to be found in human experience. There are now, altogether, 1,120 of these co-operative societies in Great Britain, with over a million of members and whose joint-stock capital, or savings, together amounts to about 35,000,000 of dollars. Is not this indeed a tall oak to grow from such a little acorn as the saving of enough to buy a little tea and sugar? Now I see no reason why the women of Boston shonldshould not, in some such fashion, start and build up a cooperative laundry.It is true that co-operativco-operative labor would be more difficult than co-operative buying, but bright minds have overcome greater obstacles than that.But, meanwhile, the domestic science department of this club may find a much-needed work ready prepared for their hands; And that is to make an organized, persistent effort to have domestic science taught to girls from ten years of age and upward, in the schools of this locality. When we reflect what careful preparation is now deemed necessary in order to teach teachers how to teach, we would not wonder that so large a number of mothers who have domestic knowledge themselves but are not trained in the art of teaching, do not know how to successfully train their own daughters. And when we reflect upon how many mothers themselves do not even have a high grade of knowledge of any kind, we need not wonder that thousands of girls are now growing up in ignorance of this most vital science. Undoubtedly, what could be taught in the schools would be but an outline and a beginning, and foundation to build on in the future, but even this foundation of domestic science would be well worth all the time and trouble that might be spent in procuring its establishment, and it would be a great credit to the WOMAN'S ERA could this be acheivedachieved through their endeavor. If possible it would be well to have such scientific traningtraining given equally to boys and to girls, for such teaching would have a moral result, as well as technical value, in teaching boys to properly estimate what they are now apt to scorn as inferior work merely because they deem it women's work. To the true scientist no work is inferior work though there may be reasons why persons of great capacity should leave certain kinds to be done by those of less varied capability, but there is no question that our life is richer if we have sometime each tried our own hand at every branch of human labor within reach of our experiment. The woman who has never herself actually performed any of the duties of the household is at as great a disadvantage as the manuufacturermanufacturer who has never performed any part of the labor of a manufacturing business. As I have before stated, I believe in division of labor, and I think all household labor will be better, done when women evolve some plan by which cooking may be done by a highly skilled and scientific cook, laundering by an equally accomplihsedaccomplished laundress and general cleaning by another expert specially trained for this branch of work, just as in a manufacturing establishment, one was a fireman, another engineer, another book-keeper, and so on. But many of the richest manufacturers in the country are now requiring their sons to begin at the bottom of the business ladder, as humble workmen in their father's or some other person's factory, learning the work of every department by actually doing the work. Just so, I think young women should begin to learn domestic science by going through every operation from cleaning stoves and building fires, to the artistic arrangement of a parlor. I have myself gone through every step of such discipline, and for no amount of money would I part with the feeling of independence, that has come from possession of thithe practical knowledge concerning every branch of labor that can be carried on in a household. It seems as if every person who can hold a brush ought to know how to scrub a pine table or floor. Imagine then my astonishment when the domestic scientist who was my instructor proved to me that the way I imagined it should be done was of all others the worst way. I wonder how many present have learned that an unpainted wooden

table can only be kept in its most beautiful state of whiteness when scrubbed with cold water? It was, at any rate, a revelation to me, who had supposed grease could only be extracted by the use of the hottest of hot water. In one of the classes which I attended was a mother of a family, over 40 years of age, who had never before learned the scientific mode of building a fire. She was as delighted as a child with a new toy when she finally knew how to go successfully through every step of this process, from cleaning the grate, to properly laying the kindling, and putting on coal so there could be no failure. One housekeeper in this class discovered that $2 worth of prepared kindling wood could be saved each month in the kitchen, simply by a scientific use of kindling, to say nothing of the saving of comfort and increase of pleasure which came from having the process quickly and correctly performed.So it is all through the various ramifications of household science. The average woman actually knows so little that she has not yet discovered how much there is that she does NOT know. To spread the divine discontent with such igoranceignorance, to open up new opportunities for gaining household knowledge, to exalt the high calling of the maker of homes--such is the noble work which I hope is to receive fresh impetus from the domestic science branch of the WOMAN'S ERA.Health and Beauty from Exercise.PAPER NO. 1.Mary P. EvansBy MARY P. EVANS.Two important reasons exist for taking physical exercise. Health depends upon it and it strengthens body, mind and face, and beautifies them.The person who takes no exercise, who performs no physical labor, who does not develop the muscles of the body, is, as a rule, weaker, less healthy, and more apt to contract diseases, than is the person who by physical exercise strengthens and develops the muscles.Fortunate indeed is the girl endowed with beauty, grace and mind. She is a power, an influential centre around which constantly revolve opportunities for usefulness. These three are mutually dependent. The cultivation of one alone is done at the expense of the other two. And only by developing all does the well balanced, well proportioned and strong woman result. Very often the homeliest faced girl may obtain this proportion by regulated exercise and study. There is no royal road to a graceful, elegant body, as there is not to a cultured mind. health results.?If the muscles of the back are weak and unable to keep it erect and to hinder a cramping of the abdominal organs, curvature or crookedness will result, and worse still, the spinal column will be weakened, and all or very many of the nervous diseases which come from a weak spine will follow as well as general debility, and the worse forms of nervous irritability.Many people not born beautiful may become so by physical exercise, proper habits and mental and moral development. A beautiful face with a weak, unhealthy body is all object of pity, A strong, active mind burdened with such a body loses much of its power and usefulness. While a sound, healthy body without grace and uncontrolled by refinement and intelligence makes its owner but a little better than any other healthy animal.If sufficient exercise is not taken, respiration, or breathing, is poor, and, as a result, the elastic wall of the chest is either not fully expanded or becomes abnormally contracted. The lungs from this cause are unable to supply the blood with oxygen, the great blood purifier, and consequently the surest means for disease of heart and lungs follow.If the muscles of the abdomen are neglected and left undeveloped, they cannot aid in strengthening digestion and breathing. By digestion blood is formed from the food we eat, and if digestion is poor, the formation of healthy blood is hindered; and if the breathing is not strong and good, the blood is not purified, and badhealth results. To acquire either requires hard, earnest work, much industry and courage.A face was never made permanently beautiful by cosmetics. Wholesome, healthy beauty is from within. It cannot be secured by any system of veneer. Strong, sound lungs, healthy muscles and easy, graceful limbs cannot develop when confined in stays and girdles. The mind surrounded by narrow and bad influences becomes dwarfed and weakened. The soul which is broadened by contact with other souls, which feeds on noble thoughts, is quickened by noble deeds and aids in making the weak strong, and better and happier, will soften and often make beautiful the hard, unchiseled, and irregular lines of the homeliest face. Both body and soul must have room in which to grow and neither must be poisoned or weakened by drugs or evil surroundings.Before speaking of the kind of exercise to be taken something must be said about food, ventilation of living rooms, dress and bathing.Food makes blood and blood makes flesh and muscle. The better suited the food, the better will be the blood, the flesh and the muscle. Any food which weakens the digestive organs ought to be avoided. Too much greasy and highly spiced or very rich food is a great enemy to good digestion. Generally speaking, plain wholesome food which can be easily digested, and which contains sufficient nutriment, is the food which ought to he eaten at regular intervals.The juices of meats contain the best nutrition,
		  and meats, beef, veal and fish, lose their value as
		  food in proportion to the destruction of this
		  nutrition by boiling and salting. Milk and eggs are
		  eas- (Continued on page 15.)
ily digested and good food, as are wheat, rice, potatoes, turnips, beets. carrots, parsnips and fruit. Chocolate or cocoa powdered and mixed with water or milk heated to the boiling point is refreshing and highly nutritious. All these foods are more or less valuable as blood and strength producers as they are properly or improperly prepared and eaten. The time of eating must be regular and the amount of food at each meal must be neither too much nor too little. As a general rule for an active person two and a half pounds of solid food and three pints of liquid food and three pints of water make a day's allowance.The tone, the health and life of the human body are dependent upon the blood. And the health, the strength and life-giving quality of the blood depend upon the food we eat and the air we breathe. Air is mainly composed of nitrogen and oxygen, four parts of the former and one part of the-latter, And when air is deprived of its oxygen it will not support human life. And each time that the same air passes through the lungs it loses a part of its oxygen. The blood starts from the heart fresh and pure and strong. It goes through the arteries to various parts of the body, deposits its nutrition or flesh making qualities, and then goes back through the veins to the heart again. On its return before reaching the heart, it passes through the lungs and exchanges the carbonic acid gas which it has gathered in going about the body, and which will not support animal life, for oxygen, which is necessary to the support of animal life.If the blood does not exchange its carbonic acid gas for orygenoxygen when it goes through the lungs on its way back to the heart, it becomes sluggish, loses its tone and health and instead of carrying nutrition and health and life to all parts of the body, it carries poison and we quickly see the result in pale faces, physical weakness, nervousness, depressed spirits, sallow complexions, weak minds and stunted growth.How different is the result of vigorous blood, full of oxygen and life. The person who breathes fresh air, not air already breathed by himself or other persons once or many times, will grow up strong, ruddy, active, with healthy body, skin and brain; and in condition for the very best physical and mental work.Too much emphasis cannot be put upon the necessity for an abundance of pure, fresh air in the sleeping room, the sitting room, the school room, concert hall, lecture room, sick room, and wherever time is spent. Wearing apparel, bedding, rugs, carpets, and indeed every thing that can hold disease germs ought to be thoroughly aired each day.Dressing is a matter of taste as well as health. One of the most satisfactory evidences of the progress of women is seen in the change from a style of tight lacing and tight dressing which cause the body to grow out of natural symmetry and grace, for a style of easy, comfortable and sensible dressing which allows the limbs to have free play and gives the blood a chance to circulate and flow to all parts of the body. Lacing and tight waists compress the liver and stomach and interfere with the movements of the diaphragm; this often causes headache, dyspepsia, shortness of breath, womb disease, weak back and many, many aches and pains. Women are beginning to learn that it is better to dress for health than for style, and, that the best dressing is that which aids and does not hinder healthy growth.When taking physical exereiseexercise the dress should be light and loose, and so made that the limb can have free and easy play in all directions.Any rule regulating bathing must be elastic. Too much bathing is as dangerous as too little is bad. Frequent cold water sponge baths properly taken are among the best aids to good health because they strengthen the skin and keep it free from the impurities which the body is constantly trying to throw off through the pores. The best time for the bath is immediately after rising because the body is then rested and the circulation is at the best. Bathing immediately before or after a meal should be avoided because the rubbing removes the blood from the stomach to the surface. Care must be taken to avoid the shock to a delicate organization given by cold water. Begin with the tepid bath and gradually work up to cold water. All vigorous physical exercise should be followed by a bath to remove the impurities brought to the surface, avoiding a bath while the body is too heated. Take it after the heart has begun to beat normally and follow it with brisk rubbing with a coarse towel.--ADVERTISE--
IN THE
WOMAN'S ERA!THE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTERESTS OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.The WOMAN'S ERA, as the organ of the colored women's clubs, has a large circulation in many of the large cities, notably Boston, New Bedford, Providence, New York, Chicago, Washington and Kansas City.The Literary, Musical and Domestic Departments are under the control of competent writers and crit scritics.With its large circulation among women, and particularly among women of the refined and educated classes, it offers peculiar advantages to advertisers of household articles, wearing apparel, books, magazines, musical instruments, and so forth.Its rates are exceedingly liberal. Try it, and you will not regret it.EDITORIAL.A series of accidents which would have been ridiculous had they not been so nearly tragic, befell our last issue after going to press; our paper was consequently delayed in appearance for several days. This is deeply regretted by us and we feel that we must apologize to the many kind friends, who have received this venture with so much sympathy and enthusiasm. In spite of its late appearance and rather too frequent typographical errors, we think that we are justified in speaking of the many compliments upon the appearance of our papepaper received by us. "Blowing one's own horn," vulgar as we consider it, is considered by many in this day and time, legitimate business. We have no intention, however, of indulging in this all too common pastime, but in the face of the almost eloquent silence with which our paper has been received by contemporaries, we feel that we must speak and express our gratitude for the enthusiastic personal endorsement received by us. For the rest, good work tells; we appeal to and expect to be supported by the strongest women of the country, women who will appreciate a high class paper and recognize one when seen.OUR WOMEN'S CLUBS.The growth and development of women's clubs is little less than marvelous; thinking people who at first gave little attention to the movement, have been forced to stop and seriously consider the meaning of such an uprising. Organized woman is showing herself to be a tremendous power, and happily a power almost without exception for good.In the general movement, the colored women of America have felt the quickening influence and are responding nobly. Washington, New York, Kansas City, Boston, Chicago, New Bedford, Providence, and Lawrence can all boast clubs of women organized for mutual improvement and for good works. The impulse and general plan of work of each of these leagues is the same, and yet, each adapts its work to the special needs of its members and its community, that this is so, shows the spontaneity and value of the movement.This organization of colored women means much; through it our women are brought more closely in touch with the world and the great questions of the day; by organization, not only are their own minds and talents strengthened and developed, but they are enabled to give a helping hand to those less favored; through it the inspiration of congeniality is felt, besides this each organization is a strong factor for the general elevation of the race.A certain independence of action in the leagues is admirable, but still, even here the power of organization should be recognized and used, a general interest in each other's work is not enough to gain the greatest power. To do the most good the leagues should be united to a certain degree.The especial work of this paper, is the binding together of our women's clubs, to give a knowledge of the aims and works of each to help in every way their growth and advancement and bring the colored women together in great and powerful organization for the growth and progress of the race. To this end the WOMAN'S ERA urges the holding of a conventionrconvention.HOW TO STOP LYNCHING.In his very admirable and searching address delivered in this city, April 16th, judge Albion W. Tourgee proposed as a remedy to prevent the lynching of colored people at the South, that the country where lynchings occur be compelled by law to pension the wife and children of the murdered man. This, he said would make murder costly and in self defense the local authorities would put a stop to it. At first blush, this is an attractive suggestion. But why not hang the murderers? Why make a distinction between the murderers of white men and the murderers of colored men? If the punishment for murder is hanging why hang the murderer in one case and in the other let the murderer go free and exact of the county a fine? If an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth is the rule in one case why should it not be the rule in the other case? No, the truth is this, nothing is to be expected from the South. The colored people must look to the general government. It has a right to their services and lives in time of war. They have a right to its protection certainly in time of peace. It is idle to say that it must leave to state governments the protection of the lives of its citizens. Why not leave to state governments the punishment

of counterfeiters? If the United States government can protect money, the property of its citizens against destruction at the hands of the counterfeiter, it can protect the owners of the property against loss of life at the hands of the murderer. It is an astounding proposition that a great nation is powerful enough to stop white moonshinesmoonshiners from making whiskey but is unable to prevent the moonshiners or any one else from murdering its citizens. It can protect corn but cannot protect life. It can prevent the sale of tobacco unless the seller pays a revenue to the government but it cannot protect its citizens at any price. It can go to war, spend millions of dollars and sacrifice thousands of lives to avenge the death of a naturalized white citizen slain by a foreign government on foreign soil, but cannot spend a cent to protect a loyal, native-born colored American murdered without provocation by native or alien in Alabama. Shame on such a government! The administration in power is particeps criminis with the murderers. It can stop lynching, and until it does so, it has on its hands the innocent blood of its murdered citizens.TOURGEE IN BOSTON.Whatever difference of opinion may exist as to the manner in which the telling blows of judge Tourgee were given in his recent Boston speech, all will agree that they were effective -in stirring up healthy discussion and even warm controversy among good friends of the cause he came to advocate. It is however only the old difference of means to a desired end. The methods of the christian soldier appeal most to one side, while those of the earnest student into cause and effect impress the other. Who shall say which is doing most? All kinds of methods are needed to be tried to meet the infinite varityvariety of objections to the human rights of the negro in this country. In their different ways both Judge Tourgee and Wm. Loyd Garrison are conscientiously playing their parts and both are proven friends of the needy negro. In the intense earnestness for the cause that absorbs him, that courageous champion Albion Tourgee rides rough shod to his mark. He wields a free lance and cuts right and left in placing the responsibility for the continued lawlessness of the South on the people of the North, black and white, for their apathy and indifference. Individuals churches and other organization, all came in for a share of the scathing rebuke of this wounded martyr to the cause of exact justice. If the words uttered by this man with a mission blunt and forceable as they were, shall prove effective in injecting some of his self-sacrificing ardor into the young man who now contents himself with only criticism of the ways and means used by those who are doing the work and bearing the odium of this unpopular cause, then may we hope for a speedy recognition of the futility of mere talk in the vindication of his race manhood. Let him show his credentials for something contributed worthy the seriousness of the situation.Membership in the Citizens' Rights Association should be the smallest receipt accepted of any colored person, man or woman for the privilege of citisizingcriticizing those who are showing their faith by their works.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.The milk prepared by the Boston Condensed Milk Co., is KNOWN to be a fine article.Members of the club and readers generally are asked to patronize this firm.When looking for a dressmaker, remember Miss R. A. Smith 37 Anderson St.FREE!splendid Premium Offers.By special arrangement with the Boston Training School of Music, the Woman's Era is enabled to offer the following splendid premiums which offer we venture to say is unprecedented.First Premium.READ. To the one who obtains the rgestlargest number of subfcribessubscribes, over one hundred, within the next six months we will give one year's tuition either in voice, violin, piano, or harmony and counter, point at the above-named school.Second Premium.For the second highest number of subscribers in the next six months we will offer a term at the Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute for the summer of '94 with instruction either in music, art, literature, elocution, oratory or short-hand and type-writing,Third Premium.For the three children over nine years of age, first obtaining fifty subscribers for us, a year's instruction on piano. This is for beginners.Fourth Premium.To all contestants failing to gain the premiums we will give a commission of twenty-five per cent.The Boston Training School of Music takes a specialty of the training of teachers of music, it is a school of the highest grade and for these reasons and because this school has made no distinction on account of race, the management of this paper has selected it for its premium offers. The number of young people howho come to Boston for a musical education increases yearly; through these premiums it is hoped to give a helping hand to worthy aspirants.A course in piano, voice, violin, theory or harmony and counter point at the fiestfinest school of tsits kind in the country.For futherfurther particulars address theWOMEN'S ERA, St. Augustine's TradTrade Schools, North Grove street, Boston Mass.MISS R. A. SMITH,Fashionable Dressmaker,
Orders Promptly Executed and all Work Guaranteed.37 ANDERSON STREET, BOSTON.F. S. BUTLER,
PRACTICAL TAILOR
ROOM 4, 84 MASON ST., BOSTON.
Ladies' and Gent's Clothing Cleansed, Dyed, Repaired and Altered.LITERATUREMiss Medora GouldMISS MEDORA GOULD.The Chautauquan for October last contains an articled entitled "The Southern Negro Women," by Olive Ruth Jefferson. Although several months have elaspedelapsed since its publication, it is worthy of special mention in a journal devoted to the interests of colorod wemencolored women.Miss Jefferson says very truly that the soul of civilization is incarnate in womankind, and the type finally assumed by any race of people can be best prophesied by a careful stndystudy of its superior womanhood. She advocates that the Negroes have an unquestioned right to all the opportunities of American citizenship, and speaks of what the Negro woman has endured through unknown centuries of paganism, and more than two centuries of bondage. She states that there are certain qualities that uniformly appear in the Negro women of the better sort. Among these she names the genius of good manners, a prodigious capacity for hard work, a boundless love for childhood and homemaking, and a natural love for the beautiful. The entire article is very encouraging, and cannot help but elevate Negro womanhood in the minds of all who may read it.The old saying that "A prophet is not without honor save in his own country," does not apply to JndgeJudge Tourgee. AlthonghAlthough not a native of North Carolina, he has been so long identified with that state that it is practically his home. And that he is not without honor is evidenced by the universal esteem and veneration with which he is regarded by the colored people of Greenboro and vicinity. He is unvariably referred to as a friend and benefactor of those persons with whom he has come in contact during his residence there, and they take great pride in pointing out his home to strangers.Judge Tourgee possesses a thorough knowledge of human nature and sees clearly the motives that actuate men, and the causes that produce effects and events. He has, moreover, a genuine symphathysympathy for the oppressed, and that deep insight into character which classifies and discriminates between the individuals of a race that, is generally treated as a whole. Many of the characters of his early volumes are still living in the vicinity of his home, and the thrilling incidents related by him, are corroborated by the participants.George W. Cable's new novel, "John March, Southerner," which is being published in serial form in Scribner's Magazine, deals with the same period of time as does several of Judge Tourgee's novels, the period of Reconstruction. These years, immediately following the close of the war, will furnish a subject for the novelist, the historian, the philosopher and the statesman for many years to come. There is a revival of interest in Napoleon that is phenomenal in its extent and intensity. A distinguished Frenchman has remarked that "Napoleon has again hypnotised the French people." The Century will shortly publish a history of his life which contains much new materalmaterial furnished by lately discovered manuscripts and the latest developments of research. Thus far no history has appeared in either England or France that is wholly without malice, and which conforms to the laws of historical criticism. A full statement of his carrercareer, and its effect on subsequent history can be best written by an American whose judgement would be uninfluenced by partizanshippartisanship.Although the reading of light novels may be a frivolous waste of time, and if carried to excess positively harmful, yet a wholesome light story is both refreshing and restful, epeciallyespecially to those whose reading is in the line of study. It paints a picture that quickly fades into indistinctness, but leaves behind a pleasant impression. A few light novels wisely interposed between serious study, break the current of habitual thought and invite a return to more normal and less strained conditions of mind. They who can take the novel of the day for what it is worth and make the right use of it, have learned that the mind needs recreation as truly as the body needs exercise. But this is a good habit that can very easily become a bad one.At a recent meeting of Sorosis the question was discussed whether fairy stories should be told to children. Many were of the opinion that they did more harm than good; yet there were many who made a strong plea for them. It seems a pity that childhood should be robbed of its fondest delusions, but the children who in this practical age really believe in fariesfairies are few indeed. In the case of a nervous child who would be haunted in the dark by visions of unfriendly imaginary folks, the harm might be averted if the storyteller would take pains to impress upon the mind of the little one that it was all "only make-believe."In reading the Literary Passions of Mr. Howells, one cannot help but notice at what an early age he was reading the best literature. This seems to be true of most of the men who became eminent in afterlife. We find The Pilgrim's Progress and Fox's Book of Martyrs among the first books read by several of our leaders in thouht ;gthought;  books that the youth of today find far from interesting or entertaining reading. This may be due not so much to the difference in taste, as to the fact that entertaining reading matter is much more easily obtained now than it was earlier in the century. And since the best literature can be obtained as easily as that of an inferior quality it is the duty of every one to see that young people read the best from the beginning.The millions who reverence the name of William Lloyd Garrison will heartily welcome the story of his life as told by his children. It is published in four volumes by Houghton Mifflin & Co.CHATS WITH GIRLS.Leslie WilmotDEAR GIRLS: Last month I said a few words to you about the importance of reading, and now I will tell you of a reading club in which I omam interested.A half dozen girls formed a reading class for mutual improvement. They were not particularly interested in any one subject, but thought the hours spent in desultory reading might be made prufitableprofitable as well as pleasurable.They agreed to meet once a fr tnighfortnight to discuss whatever work they mighmight have read in the meantime.The first book assigned, was "The Scarlet Letter" because it is classed as one of, if not the very best, of novels. Copies of the Salem Edition of the

book were purchased for the small sum of eighteen cents and each member of the class read it before the initial meeting.At that meeting, one read a short sketch of the life of Nathaniel Hawthorne; another, an article on Brook Farm Community; whilst others read short impressions of different characters in the story.Fortunately, at that time Richard Mansfield was playing at one of the leading, theatres, and "The Scarlet Letter" was in his repertorerepertoire. The girls attended the play and although the story, being the history of a hnmanhuman heart, is absolutely incapable of being adequately dramatized, still the times, in which the tale is located, are accurately portrayed by the drama in question.When the book was discussed, we had various opinions on its merits. (I think young people are perhaps after all the truest critics. They are not apt to be biased by the opinions of this or that eminent writer, and go at once to the root of the matter for themselves.)One girl could see no reason why it should be classed among the great novels. She thought it morbid and dull, showing, evidently, she preferred mere narrative to minute dissections of a human conscience. Another girl could find no words to equal her admiration for this really fine book and read extract after extract of the best passages.The paper on Brook Farm led to a discussion on communities in general, and the club decided to devote some time to searching for information on that subject.Some of the books suggested for reading were Plato's "Ideal Republic," Sir Thomas Moore's "UtophiaUtopia," Bulwers Lytton's "Coming Race," Bellamy' "Looking Backwards," Life of Laurence Oliphant," "The Oneida Community," and a visit was planned for the coming summer, to the Shaker settlement a few miles from our city.The members decided to read at least one half-hour each day or pay a small fine for every day omitted. The money was to be used in purchasing new books.At the second meeting, "Adam Bede," by George Elliot was discussed.Each member reported not only having read the required time, but so interested had they become in the work on hand, that they had spent a great deal of time in the libraries.One read a paper on George Elliot's two marriages; another, on George Lewes' life and works; still, another read extracts from George Elliot's "Life and Letters" by Cross, her second husband.These papers were crude, faulty and perhaps anything but well written, but they aimed only to give information for if 'reading makes the full man' certainly 'writing makes the exact one.'An article on "Dinah" brought up the subject of women as preachers. Much was said pro and con on the subject and finally, the club decided to subscribe to "The Woman's Column" so that they might know what women were doing everywhere.Time nor space will not allow me to report each meeting but enough has been said to show the plan of the work in which this class is engaged.During the winter among the works read and discussed were "Romola," "Life of Savanola," Auerbach's "On the Height," "Henry Esmond" "Life of Thackeray," and Prof. Horsford's "Norumbega."A marked improvement was noted in the papers submitted to the club, some of them reaching the dignity of being considered well written essays and accepted as such, in their school tasks.Yours,LESLIE WILMOT.WOMEN AT HOME.M. Elizabeth JohnsonM. ELIZABETH JOHNSON.SOCIAL ETIQUETTE.Among many residents of our large cities who do not pose as or desire to be "au fait" society people and yet who take pleasure in the small enjoyments of calling and entertaining, it is often a problem just how much formality should be regarded by them towards their friends. It is often thought that the simplicity of their mode of living precludes the necessity of conformation to the rigid laws established by Dame Etequette in this particular; at least, it is so thought for a time, but eventually comes the interruption just in the midst of some important household duty too, that makes us realize that the inconvenience experienced has been self caused, the root of the evil lying at our own door and being nothing less than the thoughtless, friendly invitation to "call at any time," accentuated by a more or less added protestation against formality. Now all of us know that strict, rigid formality would mar the pleasure of any friendly call, but there are a few by-laws, the knowledge of which is essential to make any call a pleasure. So, the next time the unwelcome interruption comes, instead of having the usual behind the scene monologue, and each woman knows just how impressive a performance that can be made, suppose we reason with ourselves along the following lines, and see if the observance of a few social laws will not make life smoother.Each woman should have a certain day or days when she is at home to visitors. This designated on the visiting card is all that is necessary.Immediate friends who share the privilege of unlimited entree should remember that each day or some part of it, has its duties. That if dinner is served at six, the call for a chat should not come at five minutes of six. That if nuserynursery duties must be attended to at seven, half past seven is a better hour to call than half past six. In fact it has long ago ceased to be the vogue for even one's intimate friends to "drop in." Wisdom, which comes with years, has taught people that no friend is so intimate that there may not be times when she is unwelcome, and one's dearest and nearest bow to the law which suggests the paying of a visit at a time when one's friend's are ready to receive.If you have planned a certain afternoon to see your friends no announcement of their arrival is necessary. You are simply ready to see them. Be sure and dress ueatlyneatly on such occasions. A house dress consisting of a fancy waist and plain skirt being always in good taste. A tea gown is permissablepermissible but it must not have the appearance of negligienegligee, and a street dress can be worn with approval.The custom of serving refreshments is being regarded with disfavor; the at home day is arranged so that one may surely see one's friends, and these friends come not to dine, but to have a little talk, to announce that one is not forgotten, and then to depart without having caused the hostess any worry or put her to any great expense.When calling on sick friends, it is not always well to see them; an inquiry is sufficient, or if not too ill the friend might appreciate your good wishes sent to her on your visiting card.This is only a little talk on some of the more apparent stumbling blocks, large enough to make it worth while to remove them, and therefore gain an equal proportion of comfort and happiness.SOCIAL NEWS.Irene DemortieMarion RidleyIRENE DEMORTIE -- MARION RIDLEY.The Easter Reception held at Berkley Hall on the evening of the 28th of March, was in every way a success. Excellent music, a good floor and a well arranged order of dances, combined, could not fail to afford a most enjoyable evening to all who participated. Pretty women in pretty grownsgowns and gallant men in conventinalconventional evening attire, formed a most pleasing picture; and it would indeed be a difficult task to assign the belleship in a gathering where youth, beauty and fashion met the eye at every turn.Mr. W. H. Hunt of Lawrence Academy, Groton, and Mr. John Hope of Augusta, Ga., now attending Brown University, Providence, spent their Easter vacation in Boston. Mr. Hunt will enter Harvard in the Fall as will also Mr. Frank Codoza of Washington who spent a short time in Boston last summer.Easter week several informal affairs were given; Thursday evening impromptu dance at Mrs. U. A. Ridley's, in honor of Miss Alice Smith of Newport; Friday evening Mr. and Mrs. E. E. Brown entertained a few friends at their cozy home in the Highlands; Saturday evening, Miss Georgine Glover gave an informal reception in honor of Miss Alice Smith of Newport.Despite the inclemency of the weather, the result of the four days' carnival held by the Woman's Era Club at Odd Fellow's Hall, on North Russell Street, was very satisfactory. The Carnival opened on Tuesday, April 10th, with a reception to the clergy, on Wednesday afternoon and evening the Rosebud Tea reception was given. A prettier sight has seldom been witnessed than the one presented on Thursday, Children's Day. The little ones, daintlydaintily attired, danced, marched, and played games to their hearts' content. Little Miss Leila Stubbs, a picture in red and white led the march gracefully and well. On Friday evening, the promenade concert was followed by dancing. Little Miss Florence Robinson's fancy dancing was very prettily done.The first of the F. M's Assemblies took place in the Posse Gymnasium on the evening of April 12th, and was a most delightful affair. The Gymnasium, however was not sufficiently lighted, and the pretty gowns did not show off to their best advantage. Fred White's orchestra never played better. The dance was matronized by Mrs. P.A. Glover and Mrs. W.P. Hare; Miss Mereda Gray acted as floor directress with Misses Hare, Glover and Cuney as aids. The guests included Misses Dosia Marsh, Geraldine Pindell, Miss Libbie Watson, Carrie Patterson, Lillian A. Lewis, Hattie Dabney, and Mabel Grant, Messrs. Edward Glover, Samuel Marsh, J. Percy Bond, William P. Hare, Fred Hemmings, Chas. E. Richardson, W.A. Johnson, Eugene Johnson, P.H. Johnson, Edward Richards. Robert T. Teamoh, W.H. Jackson, George Fletcher, Thaddeus Godwin and Robert Sparrow.Miss Lillian Lewis goes to Philadelphia May 7th, to attend the biennial congress at which the New England Woman's Press Association is to be represented. She will remain until the end of the week and will stay at the Metropole.A new club just started in Boston among the young men, is called the Windemere. They hold weekly meetings and their membership includes, Mr. W.P. Hare, E. Glover, W. Arthur Johnson, Mr. Eugene Johnson, Mr. W. H. Jackson, Mr. Fred Hemmings, Edward Richards and Mr. George Fletcher.The Gamlecs were to have been entertained by Miss Annie Hare, the week after Easter, but, owing to the F.M. Assembly, it was postponed until a later date.Mr. W.H. Lewis of Harvard, having undergone a most successful operation upon his nasal member, at the City Hospital has again resumed his studies.Mr. W.A. Johnson spent a few days in Newport last week.Miss Rebecca M. Downing has gone to New York for several weeks, after which she will return to Boston for a few days en route to Newport.Mr. Robert Carter of New Bedford, who has been attending the Medical College in Chicago has fully recovered from his late illness. Dr. Carter who graduated a few weeks ago, has been offered a most remunerative position to practice in the East. He is expected in Boston early next month.Baby Constance Ridley gained the greatest number of votes in the doll contest at the Woman's Era Club carnival and was the happy recipient of a very big doll almost twice the size of the ownerThe Woman's Era Club will hold a ehildren'schildren's May festival to be followed by a dance in the evening for the older people.Miss Ednorah Nahar will give a childrens' cantata at Charles Street Church, on Tuesday the 29th of May.Mrs. Edwin B. Jourdain, of New Bedford who was on a short visit to her mother, Mrs. Octavia Morse was suddenly called home to at tend the funeral of Mr. John Bush whose death on Thursday the 12th, and is much lamented by a host of friends.Bostonians will hear with regret of the sudden death of Mr. Thomas P. Saunders of Hartford who passed away on Thursday April 12th with heart failure.Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Williams of Chelsea are receiving congratulations on the birth of a son.MUSIC-DRAMA.The annual concert of Mr. Samuel Jameison which was given at Steinert Hall on Wednesday evening, April l8th was the annual success it always is, both artistically and financially. These concerts, which are never widely advertised and therefore take the form of semi-private affairs, attract the most cultivated and critical music lovers; the fact that the audience was as large as usual despite the fact that on the same evening the Handel and Hayden society was giving Elijah in celebration of the thirtieth anniversary of the directorship of Carl Zarrahn, attests to the esteem in which Mr. Jameison is held among musical artists and students. Upon this occasion Mr. Jameison was assisted by Mr. Win. Barton Robinson, basso and Mr. J. C. Manning accompanist. The first number on the programme, concert (No. 2) by Saint Saens (two movements) with the orchestral part played by Mr. Manning opened the concert auspiciously. Mr. Jameison interpreted this number with great breathbreadth of style audand clean cut techinquetechnique, the two magnificent Steinways responding to every demand made on them.The difficulties of this composition were happily met by the artist and the individuality with which it was rendered made this eminent French composer's work most enjoyable in the hearing.Mr. Jameison's other numbers consisted of a group of compositions by Edward Schutt, Rubinstein and the Rhapsodies Hongroise No. 15 by Liszt.In all of these Mr. Jameison reflected great credit on himself, never having appeared to better advantage than on this occasion the result of his hard and constant study being always en evidence.The audience was large and enthusiasicenthusiastic, and although the colored people present were comparatively few (a fact to be regretted) they represented Boston's solid social worth and that exclusiveness which is brought out only on rare occasions.At the Tourgee lecture the other evening Mr. Sydney Woodward sang "The Star Spangled Banner" in his usual acceptable syle, but the sentiment of the Song brought out a scathing rebuke from hethe courageous judge who declared that if there was anything more false and stupid than a white man calling this the land of the free and the home of the brave could be found in a black man doing it. A dead calm fell upon the audience which was suddenly broken by loud applause and laughter.Mrs. Nellie Brown Mitchell will sing at the Hon. Fred Douglaas lecture at the Peoples' Church May 10th.It is rumored that Lucille Saunders who is making quite a hit in the "Maid of Plymouth" given by the Bostonians, is Miss Minnie Saunders daughter of the late Prince Saunders of Hartford Conn.Mr. McAdoo's Concert Company is still touring through Australia but contemplates doing Japan and India ere long.Mrs. Maggie Porter Cole is singing with success in the Bermudes.The African native choir has appeared in Boston.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.Boston Training School
OF
MUSIC.
SPECIAL OBJECTTHE TRAINING OF TEACHERS OF MUSIC.
--INSTRUCTION IN--Voice Culture, Piano, Organ, Violin, Guitar, Mandolin, Etc 
Orchestral Instruments, Theory and Composition.MUSIC HALL BUILDING, BOSTON, MASSAdvertisements.BOSTON
Condensed Milk Co.'s
Plain condensed (unsweetened) Milk Is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. Sold in jars at the office, 2 1/2 Park Sq., Boston. Delivered three times per week.
ENDORSEMENT.
I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak, puny baby into a strong, plump one, after all other foods had failed.
MRS. MCGILL.
10 Lindall Place, Boston.MUSICAL INSTRUCTION
JULY AND AUGUST.Summer School of Music
IN THE
Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute,
COTTAGE CITY. MASS.Four hundred to seven hundred students each season. Lessons in Piano, (practise Clavier Method), Singing, Harmony, Counterpoint and Musical Composition.Regular Course in Literature, Science and Art.A strong faculty of Eminent Teachers.ADDRESS,
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M,, Director of Boston Training School of Music.
20 Music Hall Building,
BOSTON, - MASS.CONTRIBUTED.TO HARRIET HAYDEN.Loberto Vose KahamatinieIf queens can ever die she died a queen,so royal was her nature and her deedsFrom thought of self her gentle spirit freed,Ennobled what the world called poor and mean.Her highest wish her generous acts to screenFrom courtier's idle praise, or friendship's need.She heard in vain no tale of want or need.To Sorrow's face she brought a smile serene.And striving thus to do her Master's willAs days and months and years grew on apace,Our hearts and lives she did with blessings fill,Until He called her to a higher place.O Saint immortal, in thy heavenly sphereWe thank our Father that thou once dwelt here!LOBERTO VOSE KAHAMATINIE.STORY, PART II.A DOMESTIC SCENE.Eva LewisEVA LEWIS.As soon as she had gone, Mrs Brougham sat down in the armchair to think it over.The fire burnt low; the kettle boiled dry, and the meat burned to a cinder but still she sat there."I might have known it all along," she soliloquized. "Don't he always go to the office past Jane Myrtle's cottage. To be sure it is the shortest way, but John never used to mind a walk, and then he said he had to visit her school lately. Of course he is one of the school committee, still there are other schools besides the one Jane Myrtle teaches. Now,--yes, now I think of it many things prove that he is false. Didn't he say that plain bonnets were more becoming than gaudy ones, and quoted Jane Myrtle as an example. How blind I've been."Mr. Brougham, on his way home stopped and bought his wife a set of garnets she had long admired. He entered the house intending to give his wife the ornaments and say something about their wedding day which was not long ago, either. Full of these thoughts he entered, and when he found no dinner prepared he became seriously alarmed."What can be the matter?" he asked himself."Why, Maria, what has happened?" he inquired, on finding her sitting disconsolate before the stove. He thought she had either heard of the sudden death of some of her relatives or was seriously ill.At the sound of his voice, Mrs. Brougham started to her feet and the most casual observer would have noticed how deathly pale she was and Mr. Brougham, who was well acquainted with her, saw at once that a storm was about to burst, for what reason he knew not."Are you sick?" he asked helplessly."Sick! yes, sick at heart," she answered, "but what more had I to expect?" "Why did you take me a happy, innocent girl from my father's house to be insulted in this manner? I'm sorry I ever saw you.""Maria, what is the meaning of this? Have you suddenly lost your senses?""O yes, lost my senses! Probably Jane Myrtle had not lost hers.""What has Jane Myrtle to do with it? I cannot imagine her acting in this inexplicable manner.""That's right. Do take her part. Just what I expected!" and Mrs. Brougham burst into tears."I repeat that I am utterly at a loss to understand what you mean," replied Mrs. Brougham."O, you cruel, hard-hearted villain, nothing is too cruel for you to do or say," answered his wife."What have I done?" again demanded Mr. Brougham, in an angry tone."Done?" again replied Mrs. Brougham, as the memory of her wrongs came over her, she lost control over herself and bestowed epithet after epithet upon Mr. Brougham. He lost his temper also and a violent quarrel ensued which ended in his saying that she might return to her father as soon as she liked and apply for a divorce at once, in fact the sooner, the better. Taking up his hat, he went out and slammed the door.So the day begun so auspiciously, bid fair to end disastrously enough, owing to the wind and a meddlesome busybody. Mrs. Brougham went to her chamber and began preparing for her departure."I shall return home," she kept repeating; "but first I'll let Jane Myrtle know what I think of her." Mrs. Brougham therefore, dressed herself as carefully as if she was going to make a ceremonious call and started for Miss Myrtle's cottage.Within a few rods of the house, she met her nephew."Whither bound this windy day?" he inquired."I am going to make a call," she answered compressing her lips.Just then a gust of wind coming around a corner nearly took them off their feet, and blowing off Mrs. Brougham's veil lodged it in the snow.Her nephew caught it, returned it to her and remarked, "The wind seems to have a grudge against your family. You ought to have seen Uncle John this morning, the wind blew away his pocket handkerchief and he stood looking up and down just as if he could not think what had become of it.""Where were you,?" inquired Mrs. Brougham, eagerly."Home," looking out of the window he answered.Then a bright thought entered Mrs. Brougham's head that perhaps Miss Myrtle found the article the wind blew away but she rejected it instantly.(TO BE CONTINUED.)CHILDREN'S MAY FESTIVAL.Eva LewisODD FELLOW'S' HALL'North Russell Street.TUESDAY MAY 1 ST '94Solo Dancing,
By FLORENCE ROBINSON,May Pole Dance,
By TWELVE GIRLS.Minuet Dance,
By FOUR GIRLS and FOUR BOYS.General dancing for children from 3 to 8 p. m. only.After 8 the friends of the children are invited to participate in the Festival.Festival under the management of MISS EVA LEWIS and MISS MARION RIDLEY of the Contributes' Club, of the WOMEN'S ERA.Tickets can be obtained of the managers. Refreshments for sale.ADMISSION 25 CENTS.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ATLANTA, GA.
REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D.D. President.
THIS Institution trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedom of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions from those who are willing to help towards their education. Write to the President.WHY YOU SHOULD SUBSCRIBE TO THE WOMAN'S ERA.Because it represents the best thought and work of the most advanced women of your race, and should therefore interest you.
Because it will keep you informed on matters you cannot afford to be ignorant of.
Because being a woman's movement, it is bound to succeed.
Because it is readable, it contains sixteen pages of solid matter, no plate matter, reprints, no filling up with headings and leads.
Because its subscription price is only one dollar a year.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 2. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.DO YOU WANT
TO OWN YOUR OWN HOME?
THEN READ THIS!IF YOU WANT TO BUY A HOUSE IN CAMBRIDGE, SOMERVILLE, DORCHESTER OR EVERETT . . . IT WILL PAY YOU TO CALL ONBALDWIN & DORSEY, Real Estate, Mortgage and Insurance Brokers,They make a specialty of property in the suburbs.
They furnish purchase money at low rates of interest.
They will lend you money to build a house on your own land.Stop! Pay no more Rent!  Begin now to buy your own home!BALDWIN & DORSEY, 
Real Estate, Mortgages and Insurance,
555 MAIN STREET,  CAMBRIDGEPORT.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
OF BOSTON Street Railway Builders and Contractors for Public Works.ESTIMATES MADE FOR A COMPLETE UNDERGROUND SYSTEM.GEO. S. BARNES. President.
STANLEY RUFFIN, Sec'y and Treas.
34 School Street, Boston.J.P. BOND & CO.
Gentlemen's Furnishing Goods,
Shirts, Cuffs and Collars.
Business and Dress Shirts, $1 .00 and $ 1.50--Best Value. Cheviots, Percales,
and Fancy Shirts, 75c. to $2.00. 
Nice line of Hosiery and Underwear, Handkerchiefs, etc. Neckwear, 50c.
141 Dartmouth Street, - BOSTON.
DARTMOUTH LAUNDRY.The Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 3.BOSTON, MASS.,FRIDAY, JUNE 1, 1894. PRICE 10 CENTS.THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the National Federation of Afro-American Women, and devoted to the Interests of the Women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country.Published monthly, in Boston, by JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, Editors and Publishers.SPECIAL CONTRIBUTORS.Medora W. Gould    Leslie WilmotMarion Ridley      Irene DeMortie    M. Elizabeth Johnson.SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Club Rates, one hundred copies,   -    7.00Subscriptions Payable in Advance."NEW ENGLAND HOSPITAL FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN."Ednah D. CheneyEDNAH D. CHENEY.Among the most important and successful of the movements of the "Women's Era" is that for opening the Medical profession to Women. I cannot take space enough to narrate the whole history of this interesting movement, which was heralded by the brave work of a few pioneers like Harriot K. Hunt, Elizabeth Blackwell and others, and which has now spread through the civilized world, but I wish to give only a few facts in regard to an institution in our own city which has done a great work for the education of women, as well as for enlightened charity on the broadest principles.It is not the first hospital of this kind in the country, being antedated by a few years, by the New-York Infirmary, and the Hospital connected with the medical college of Philadelphia. It has been followed by the establishment of a large number of hospitals in various parts of the Union, most of which trace their origin directly to the influence to one or other of these three institutions.The New England Hospital grew out of a clinical department in the Old Female Medical College but was established as an entirely independent institution in 1862. This was during the civil war when the public interest was absorbed in the struggle for the preservation of the Union and the emancipation of the Slave. It started without any resources but a little furniture, its brave enthusiastic physician, Dr. M.E. Zakrzewska, and the unlimited faith of its founders in the goodness of their cause and the liberality of New England.The Hospital was incorporated in 1863 and the three women who are named in the act of incorporation are all living, after a period of thirty one years to rejoice in its success.Its object cannot be more briefly stated than in the words of the original By-Laws.1st.-To provide for women medical aid of competent physicians of their own sex.2nd.-To assist educated women in the practical study of medicine.3d.-To train nurses for the care of the sick.These purposes have been strictly carried out.One great incidental good has been the lessening of the prejudice against Hospital treatment in the minds of the poor. So many of the poor women suffering from chronic maladies have found comfort and help from the care of physicians of their own sex, and the administration of the hospital has been so simple and homelike in its character, that women are ready to receive help here that they cannot have in their own homes.I am glad to say that this feeling is not confined to women's hospitals, for the improvement in all hospitals has made them acceptable to the general public, but I still think that the woman physician has had a large influence in producing this good result.The surgical work of the Hospital has been especially important and interesting, and many a woman has been restored to the work and enjoyment of life through the help she has received. The great modern improvements in surgery which have made life saving operations safe, which were considered "unjustifiable," thirty years ago, have made, this a most satisfactory branch of the profession.The Maternity work has outgrown its original limits and is now carried on in a new building appropriately dedicated to two of the greatest benefactors of the cause, Sam'l E. Sewall who as a director of the old

college was the first to insist upon clinical instruction for Women Physicians, and the one who secured the inestimable services of Dr. Zakrzewska; and his noble daughter, Lucy E. Sewall who was first student and afterwards President and Attending Physician of the Hospital, and who served until her death as Attending and advisory Physician.One of the great needs of the management is now that of a new surgical pavilion in which the surgeons can work with the help of all modern conveniences.The object of training nurses was never lost sight of. This was the first effort in the United States to put this branch of education on a thorough basis, and it was mainly to the fine organizing talent of the lamented Dr Susan Dimoch, that it was indebted for its success. Since that time many similar institutions have been established throughout the country, until now almost every Hospital in the country has one connected with it. The good accomplished by these schools is very great, they give to the Physician and surgeon a trained ally who can carry out his orders intelligently, and thus often enable him to make fewer visits and yet treat the case more efficiently. The comfort to the patient is inestimable, and anxious friends have a helper whose skill and fidelity is guaranteed by those who have long watched her course.Another incidental advantage of both the Hospital and the Training School is the instruction thus given to the families of the patients, in the care of the sick, and the principles of Hygiene.But while joyfully recounting the admirable work done by other hospitals and training schools in our city and elsewhere, I am afraid that the New England stands alone in her honorable record of entire and equal justice to all races and colors. She has always received patients of every race, and the Negro, the Indian, the Anglo Saxon, and I believe the Malay have been seen lying side by side in their little beds receiving each the same tender and loving care.When a colored girl applied for admission to the training school it was feared by that the existing prejudices might cause a feeling that would be injurious to the patients, but the Directors refused to take counsel of such fears and quietly carried out their own broad views. Since that time, some seventeen years ago, many colored pupils have been admitted to the school after passing the usual careful investigation into their character and attainments.I am happy to say that these pupils have been up to the average of the school in their standing as pupils, and in one or two cases, at least, have been superior in their qualifications, and have held high positions in the school. In no instance, to my knowledge, has there been any objection made by patients to them on account of their color; on the contrary they have often been decided favorites.While I am very anxious to extend this work among the colored people both at the North and the South, believing that it is a noble profession for which they are well adapted, I wish to add a caution that it is one that requires superior character and intelligence, and a good thorough English education. It is very desirable that candidates should be graduates of high schools.It is especially important that colored nurses should have good education and previous training, because they will be much needed for superintendents of Training schools in the institutions at the South.Colored pupils have also been received as internes or resident students of Medicine. All internes must have the diploma of a college in good standing. The East Indian, Dr. Joshee, was received by exceptional favor for a few months, but unfortunately her health failed and she was obliged to leave.The Hospital is, open to visitors between two and four o'clock p.m., and the Superintendent will be happy to give full information in regard to it.THE DRINK TRAFFIC VS. LABOR.Jessie ForsythJESSIE FORSYTH.The liquor traffic in all its worst features is an especial outrage upon the decent poor. The vice of drinking is not confined to the lower order of society. It is not the working man who supports the barrooms attached to expensive hotels or the fashionable restaurants. And it is a fact that the thousands who make up

the membership of the various temperance organizations are almost entirely of the working class.But the sober working man is compelled to suffer from the annoying and degrading neighborhood of the saloon, with its offensive and revolting sights and sounds and odors. Writing in the Atlantic Monthly a few years since, George Frederick Parsons says:--"The prosperous taxpayer, who grumbles at the levies made upon wine, may be thankful that his bank account secures him at least partial freedom from the worst products of the saloon. The poor mechanic, whose narrow earnings compel him to accept the life of the tenement house, cannot shelter himself in the same way. He may be a temperate man himself. He may be a Christian. He may be desirous of raising his family respectably, and of keeping them untainted. But the polluting contiguity which poverty compels makes him an involuntary witness and auditor of all the brutalities and obscenities provoked by drink in the most depraved of his neighbors, and he cannot keep from the ears of his wife or daughters sights and sounds, which in themselves constitute infection."It is the vote of the wealthy class which is largely responsible for the forcing of the liquor traffic upon the community. It is an acknowledged fact that at the city election of 1892 it was the vote of the Back Bay district which prevented Boston from obtaining a majority in favor of "no license." If the right of local option were extended so as to cover the wards and precincts of the city, and the citizens who vote to license the rum shops were compelled to have them in their own districts, a large proportion of the saloons would be found in the aristocratic quarters of Boston instead of as at present being crowded into the poorer localities.It is an obvious injustice that the poor man should have the saloon forced upon him by the rich man's vote.Another injustice to the well-doing poor, is the fact that the working class, as a whole, is very often judged by the conduct of the meanest and lowest specimen, Often an excuse for keeping wages down is found in the fact that many men spend a large proportion of their earnings in drink.Again, the man of dissipated habits, no matter what his skill may be, is forced, in order to retain employment at all, to accept work at any price. There are employers who are not slow to avail themselves of this fact, and too often the sober workman finds the price of his labor reduced by reason of the bad habits of his fellow craftsman.It has become the common usage to make excuses for drinking among the lower classes on the plea that they are driven to it by their poverty. "Let him drink and forget his woe," it is said. I sometimes wonder whether a little of the sympathy given to the working man, whose hard conditions have driven him to drink, would not be better bestowed upon his wife and children, whose miseries are augmented by every dram which he takes to drown his own.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 3. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.BUTLER R. WILSON,
ATTORNEY AND COUNSELLOR AT LAW,
NOTARY PUBLIC,
34 School Street, (Room 33)
BOSTON.D.A. NEWCOMB & SON,
Dealers in
FRESH, SALT AND SMOKED FISH.
Fresh opened Oysters and Clams.
194 Cambridge St., Boston, Mass.
Orders called for and delivered promptly.THE AMERICAN WRINGER CO.
BRANCH STORE.
13 & 15 BROADWAY EXTENSION,
BOSTON, - - MASS.
Manufacturer of Clothes Wringers.
All kinds of Wringers and Sweepers repaired.
Orders by mail promptly attended to.THE NURSING OF SICK CHILDREN.Marie Louise BurgessMARIE LOUISE BURGESS.This branch of nursing is considered by nurses and doctors as very hard work. Special aptitude, as well as education is necessary, the nurse should be a good reliable woman, firm, kind and gentle, able to carry out orders with discretion, be cheerful and even tempered, having a love for her work. If she loves her work and is qualified, it would be better to have her even not trained, because often trained nurses are a failure in this branch. Appearances of disease are alike in children, and they (the children) act themselves, and we are able to tell by their actions the seat of their pain.If the love and confidence of the child are won, it is easier

to manage it, and this promotes its well-being and improvement. Power not only to observe, but ability to interpret observation is very necessary. Always find out the most important symptoms and indications; the position, appearance and manner of the child are indicative, and the physician relies on the nurse for these.The care of a spoiled child is very hard work; if it were in a hospital it would naturally do as the other children. If the child will not take the medicine or nourishment, the nurse must insist, and compel him to do so. It is better to be truthful and tell the child you are going to hurt him, rather than pretend you are not, when you know better. If the medicine is unpleasant, tell the child before giving it, under no conditions deceive him or let him lose confidence in you.The less he is handled the better: the room where he is sick ought to be light and sunny, with good ventilation, cheerful and pretty. Everything unnecessary ought to be removed, carpets taken up, the medicines, utensils, and plenty of hot water ought to be kept in a little adjoining room. A small oil-stove is always convenient for the use of the nurse. Assume control of the room, do not allow too many to be over it, only one head is necessary. Illness is more visible in children than older people as their organism is delicate and reacts quicker. They generally become suddenly ill, and either suddenly improve or die. There is seldom any lingering. In the simplest trouble temperature generally rises and vomiting occurs; other children ought to be kept away. The sick child ought to be lightly fed, bowels attended to. When a medical attendant is called tell the symptoms, order of development, severe or not, dejections and urine. Take temperature always by rectum; pulse and respiration when asleep; a slow pulse is more ominous than a quick one, it may possibly be caused by brain pressure.Subjective symptoms, those which we see, crying, colic, blue color of the mouth. In lung trouble there are low, short moans, a raising of shoulders and head. Sharp screams generally indicate brain trouble. In abdominal trouble the legs are drawn up, the child generally lying on his back. In brain and spinal diseases there is stiffness of the head, muscles of the neck drawn back. Observe closely the condition of the body when undressed, in all cases, for scarlet fever or measles may-be the trouble.If he is to be examined, have him already when the doctor comes, the clothing loosened, and a warm blanket to put the child in, also warm towels for use. Don't let him see the preparations; never let him see hot applications, leeches, etc. Cover the leech with cotton if you have occasion to use it, and when it drops off, bathe well the bitten part, and bandage.Enemas are given for diarrhoea and constipation; also for food, in cases where the child cannot take it by mouth. Always keep a baby clean, bathe every day, have everything around it clean. A draw sheet is a great help. For a bath, put a tub of water, the right temperature, covered with a sheet, into the room where the bath is to be given, after the child has been prepared, then lower the sheet into the water with him on it. The child should be undressed before the water is gotten ready, and warmly wrapped in blankets. When a sponge bath has to be given, just turn him from side to side, in so doing you will prevent bed sores. Keep up the appetite, feed systematically; never waken unless very weak; towards morning give nourishment. An extra jacket over night shirt, and flannel shirt next the skin, keeps the patient very comfortable.A surgical gown ought to be open all the way down. The child, after a surgical operation should be put to bed on a firm mattress, with sheets very smooth, oftentimes it is necessary to keep a rubber bed pan under him.In the future THE WOMAN'S ERA will be supplied to clubs, leagues and societies at the rate of seven cents a copy to be sold by them for ten cents.Only clubs taking one hundred copies will be entitled to an advertisement.Clubs are entitled to commission on subscriptions sent in their name. Letters from clubs for publication and financial returns must be made on or before the 18th of each month.Money should be made payable to THE WOMAN'S ERA and be forwarded by registered letter, draft, check or post office order to 103 Charles street, Boston, Mass.SHALL WE HAVE A CONVENTION OF THE COLORED WOMEN'S CLUBS, LEAGUES AND SOCIETIES.What Prominent Women have to say.The WOMAN'S ERA believes that the time is ripe for a convention of the colored women of the country. To agitate the subject it proposes to publish the views of influential women.The letters below are in answer to the following questions.1. Do you favor a convention of the colored women's Clubs, leagues and societies?2.- What in your -opinion is the most available place and time for such a congress?3. State why you do or do not favor a convention.MRS. FANNIE HARRIER WILLIAMS,Chicago, Ill.The good women of Boston are deserving of much praise for the largeness of heart and outlook so happily shown in the creation and publication of the WOMAN'S ERA. At the very time when race interest seems at such a low ebb, when our leaders seem tongue-tied, dazed and stupidly inactive in the presence of unchecked lawlessness, and violent resistance to Negro advancement, it is especially fortunate and reassuring to see and feel the rallying spirit of our women voicing itself in words of hope, courage and high resolves in a journal that seems to spring out of the very heart and peculiar needs of our women.I know of no publication having for its existence and possibilities such inspirations and rare opportuneness as your bright journal. The WOMAN'S ERA is the face of our colored women turned upward to the star of hope. It is the timely message of love and sympathy from colored women to women everywhere. It happily suggests that we can do so much for each other in all the most important interests of our lives, that we will have more time and reason for courage than for despair. To thousands of our women your paper will come as the first intimation of the wideness of the world about them and the stretch of human interest and sympathy. Thousands of them will discover their own strength and a certain sense of importance in this gradual coming together of our women all over the land in clubs and leagues organized for high purposes.Referring to the proposition of holding a convention or congress of colored women's clubs, I feel like suggesting a word of caution against too much eagerness for mere spectacular demonstration of our present enthusiasm for good works. It must readily occur to the more thoughtful readers of the WOMAN'S ERA that large conferences of women inexperienced in the functions of deliberative bodies and without well defined and settled policies of action would be fraught with as many possibilities of evil as of good. We should be careful to avoid the examples of our colored men, whose innumerable Conventions, Councils and Conferences during the last twenty-five years have all begun in talk and ended in talk. We should not degrade our own high purposes into what as yet must be a mere imitation of the methods and work of long established Woman's Clubs. I believe that it is possible for us to work out, define and pursue a kind of club work that will be original, peculiarly suitable to our peculiar needs and that will distinguish our work essentially from the white women's clubs.But I do not want to be understood as opposing a convention of colored women's clubs, or underestimating the large benefits that could certainly result from a conference of our representative women. But having in mind the many and peculiar weaknesses that have too frequently brought the meetings of some of the most intelligent women of the country into ill-repute, I believe it would be wiser for us to postpone the holding of such a conference two or three years, or until we are able to make such a conference impressive and grandly significant by a display of thoughtfulness, definiteness of purpose, and the presentation of facts and figures relative to work done and planned to be done. By extending in every direction the organization of these leagues or clubs, by bringing into them every good and capable woman, and by educating ourselves in all the more important needs of our home and social life, we shall be able in two or three years to startle the country by a surprising exhibition of good sense, intelligent self-interest and dignity of purpose.NEWS FROM THE CLUBS.PROVIDENCE, R.I.On April 15 the women of Providence met with Mrs. Brown of John street and organized the Sojourner South Club for their mutual improvement and development. It was decided that the club should meet every second Wednesday in the month, and that every three months a public meeting should be held. Following are the officers: Mrs. Emory Turner, president; Mrs. Frank Brown and Mrs. Laura Nokar, vice presidents; Mrs. Louise V. Johnson, cor. secretary; Miss Roberta Dunbar, recording secretary; Mrs. Martha Taylor, treasurer. We shall be happy to report progress in our work to the ERA.BOSTON.The last regular meeting of the Woman's Era Club was in the hands of the committee on temperance, Mrs. A. G. Brown (widow of Wm. Wells Brown) chairman. After a recitation by Mrs. Gertrude Cromwell, Miss Jessie Forsyth, the well known temperance worker, addressed the ladies informally. By her fluent, interesting manner, Miss Forsyth made her remarks what is seldom characteristic of temperance remarks, really delightful, as well as forceful. The club went into executive session after the lecture. Mrs. F. R. Ridley, cor. secretary of the club, submitted an open letter to Mrs. Chant, prepared by her for the club's endorsement. The letter was unanimously endorsed, and the club voted to forward it to the different leading pa-

pers. It was accordingly sent to the prominent Sunday papers of New York and Boston, in most of which it received marked attention. Following is the letter:AN OPEN LETTER TO MRS. LAURA ORMISTON CHANT.Dear Mrs. Ormiston Chant:One year ago this month the members of the Woman's Era Club of Boston, Mass., were privileged to have you address them as a body. The occasion was the first public meeting of the club and besides yourself, Mrs. Lucy Stone, Mrs. Cheney, Mrs. Diaz and Mrs. Spaulding spoke. It is safe to say that of all these noble women and fine speakers, no one did more than yourself in strengthening the impulse to good works, in giving fresh inspiration towards right living. Your name and that speech has been to us refreshing memory; think then the shock it has occasioned us to hear that through your efforts, a resolution at the National Conference of the Unitarian church, denouncing lynching, was defeated.We feel assured and do truly believe that you opposed the resolution from a high moral standpoint, but we also feel assured that your position on this subject is the result of influences entirely one-sided, and that you will it least be interested to hear the other side.We, the members of the Women's Era Club, believe we speak for the colored women of America. We have organized, as have our women everywhere, to help in the world's work, not only by endeavoring to uplift ourselves and our race, but by giving a helping hand and an encouraging word wherever they may be called for. As colored women, we have suffered and do suffer too much to be blind to the snfferingssufferings of others, but naturally, we are more keenly alive to our own sufferings than to others', and we feel that we would be false to ourselves, to our opportunities and to our race, should we keep silence in a case like this. We have endured much, and we believe with patience, we have seen our old, broken-down wanderers, their youth and strength spent in bondage. We, ourselves, are daily hindered and oppressed in the race of life; we know that every opportunity for advancement, for peace and for happiness will be denied us; we know that in most sections Christian men and women will absolutely refuse not only to live beside us, to eat with us, but also to open their church doors to us; we know that our children, no matter with what tenderness they may be reared, are considered legitimate prey for insult; we know that our young girls can at any time be thrust into foul and filthy smoking cars; no matter what their straits, refused food and shelter if sought among whites in many sections. We feel deeply the lack of opportunities, for the culture brought by the public libraries, the concert and lecture halls which are everywhere denied us at the South. We view these thing., with amazement, but realizing that prejudice can only be eliminated by time and our general progress, we have tried to bear these indignities put upon us by a professedly Christian people with the fortitude and dignity of real Christians. All this we have borne and do bear with more or less patience, but in the interest of common humanity, in the interest of justice, for the good name of our country, we solemnly raise our voices against the horrible crimes of lynch law as practised in the South, and we call upon Christians everywhere to do the same, or be branded as sympathizers with the murderers.We here solemnly deny that the black men are the foul fiends they are pictured; we demand that until at least one crime is proved upon them, judgment be suspended.We know positively of case after case where innocent men have died horrible deaths; we know positively of cases that have been "made up"; we know positively of cases where black men have been lynched for white men's crimes. We know positively of black men murdered for insignificant offences. All that we ask for is justice, not mercy or palliation, simple justice, surely that is not too much for loyal citizens of a free country to demand. We do not pretend to say there are no black villiansvillains; baseness is not confined to race; we read with horror of two different colored girls who have recently been horribly assaulted by white men in the South. We should regret any lynchings of the offenders by black men, but we shall not have occasion; should these offenders receive any punishment, it will be a marvel. We do not brand the white race because of these many atrocities committed by white men, but because lynch law is not visited upon this class of offenders, we repudiate the claim that lynching is the natural and commendable outburst of a high-spirited people.We do not expect white women shall feel as deeply as we. We know of good and high-minded women made widows, of sweet and innocent children, fatherless, by a mob of unbridled men and boys "looking for fun." In their name we utter our solemn protest. For their sakes we call upon workers of humanity everywhere, if they can do nothing for us, in mercy's name not to raise their voices against us.FLORIDA RUFFIN RIDLEY,Cor. Sec'y. Woman's Era Club.Boston,May 10, 1894.STORY.
PART III
A DOMESTIC SCENEEva LewisEVA LEWIS.Arriving at Miss Myrtle's cottage, she bade her nephew good-bye and entered the gate. "Don't be so eager to get rid of my valuable company, Aunt Maria," he said, "I am going to see the schoolma'am myself about an unfinished sum."Mrs. Brougham replied to Miss Myrtle's friendly greeting in the coolest possible manner, and saying her business could wait until Charlie got through with his sum, seated herself with a frigid look.The sum was soon explained and Miss Myrtle was just turning to her visitor when seeing the flower in a vase Master Charlie exclaimed: "Who

broke off your calla lily, Miss Myrtle?""The wind, my dear, and it also brought me a souvenir," said she, pointing to the table where lay the identical handkerchief with the monogram turned up. "I believe it is the very one Uncle John lost. Yes" he continued, taking it up, "here is his monogram. Isn't this your hair. Aunt Maria? Mother says that any one would know it if they met you in the Feejee Islands."Mrs. Brougham blushed, stammered and Charlie felt ashamed, while Miss Myrtle said, "Charlie, I don't think your mamma made that remark "Feejee Islands," it sounds very much like one of your own." Well, she said something of the sort," replied Charlie.Mrs. Brougham began to talk to Miss Myrtle about a fair in which Miss Myrtle was interested and promised to help both with time and money.I am very glad to restore your handkerchief. The monogram is very prettily done," said Miss. Myrtle as Mrs. Brougham departed.As Mr. Brougham came slowly home at night conscience was busy at work. "What could have been the matter with Maria to-day? She is not generally unreasonable, and besides, I myself was not altogether blameless; how quickly I lost my temper." Thus he soliloquized. "I will go home instead of off to the club and see what she has got to say."The front part of the house was all dark, and instantly a thought struck him. Suppose she had taken him at his word and returned home. Determined to know the worst, Mr. Brougham opened the door and entered the dining room. Supper was ready and Mrs. Brougham was making tea. As soon as he entered she said, "We are all liable to be mistaken. Let us forget and forgive, as the children say.""With all my heart," replied her husband.After tea she told her husband how matters stood. He heard her in silence until she began Charlie's part and then he exclaimed, "Ah, the rogue, he shall have a new pair of skates to-morrow." Here's a peace offering for yourself," he added. drawing out the garnets.Just then the door bell rang. Mrs. Grant, like all other gossips came to see the effect of her work. Mrs. Brougham met her with a pleasant smile. "See these garnets, are they not lovely? My husband has just given them to me.""Very fine indeed," replied Mrs. Grant with an envious smile, "how kind he is.""You see," broke in Mr. Brougham, "your kind offices have come to no good and in future, my dear Mrs. Grant, always be sure when you speak.So the day in spite of kind friends and the wind ended happily after all.HEALTH AND BEAUTY FROM EXERCISEMary P. EvansMARY P. EVANS.Paper No. 2.The object aimed at in taking physical exercise is a harmonious and symmetrical development of the entire body. The arms, the legs, the neck, the trunk must be proportionately developed. The ability to lift heavy weights, or run fast, or jump high, or perform feats of strength in one direction, if acquired by developing only one set of muscles, is a dangerous power, It is obtained at the expense of other muscles, and is a one-sided development that destroys all harmony and symmetry.The power to lift, run, or kick or jump well does not always carry with it health. Strong arms are often found with weak muscles of back and abdomen, and all the conditions for spinal, heart and lung diseases. It therefore follows that any exercise which gives a one-sided development, which weakens one set of muscles to build up another set, which pays attention to one part of the body, and neglects all other parts, is to be avoided. While the system which finds the weak spots and strengthens them, which stops the development of one set of muscles at the expense of another set, and builds up all in proportion, which does not neglect the heart, or back, or abdomen, but cares for and builds up all portions of the body so necessary to a good figure, easy, graceful carriage and a strong, healthy body is the system to be adopted.Physical development is a thing of slow growth. Crooked limbs, weak arms and legs, weak back and abdomen, flabby muscles, and weak lungs and heart, cannot be straightened

and made strong and cured in a week. The exercises must be taken carefully, regularly and continuously. The rule that practice makes perfect will apply here as elsewhere. No permanent benefit is to be secured by taking the exercise for several days and then neglecting it for several days or a week. Practice must be systematic, at regular intervals, and it must be progressive.Classic Greece furnishes the highest development of beauty, elegance and grace. Her orators have charmed many ages, and her philosophers have earned the intellectual leadership of the world. The Greeks were the first to learn and apply the truth that mind and hand and heart are mutually dependent; that a well rounded, healthy trained body is the greatest aid to a sound, vigorous and well-equipped mind. They began with the body and the body was trained in the open air.The Germans and the Swedes have followed their lead and developed the idea. With them legitimate athletic sports, games and pastimes in the open air have been supplimented with systematic gymnastics, and the beneficial results may be seen in the national character. Dr. E.M. Hartwell, in a paper delivered at the "Physical Training Conference" in 1889, in developing this point said:"Gymnastics have been most popular and general among the most highly trained nations, such as the Greeks of old and the Germans of to-day. The most athletic, and, at the same time, one of the most ill-trained of modern nations, is the British. I mean simply this, that an Englishman believes, and acts upon the belief, that you come to do a thing right by doing it, and not by first learning to do it right, and then doing it, whereas, the Germans leave little or nothing to the rule of thumb, not even in bodily education. German gymnastics embrace three well-marked fields or departments; viz. popular gymnastics, school gymnastics and military gymnastics. The organization of the last two departments is maintained and controlled by the government for strictly educational purposes; while the Turnvereine, as the popular gymnastic societies are called, are voluntary associations of a social and semi-educational, but wholly popular and patriotic character. The fondness of the German people for gymnastics is as marked a national trait as is the liking of the British for athletic sports. The German system of gymnastics has, been most highly developed in Prussia, where not far from a fifth of the population is undergoing systematic physical training at the present time, under the combined agencies of the schools, the army, and the Turnvereine. In Switzerland and in Norway and Sweden, you will find school and military gymnastics, especially in Sweden, quite as fully developed as in Germany, and popular gymnastics not so much so."ADVERTISE IN THE WOMAN'S ERA!This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 3. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.THE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTEREST OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.FREE!Splendid Premium Offers.By special arrangement with the Boston Training School of Music, the Woman's Era is enabled to offer the following splendid premiums which offer we venture to say is unprecedented.FIRST PREMIUM.READ. To the one who obtains the largest number of subscribers, over one hundred, within the next six mouths we will give one year's tuition either in voice, violin, piano or harmony and counterpoint at the above-named school.SECOND PREMIUM.For the second highest number of subscribers in the next six months we will offer a term at the Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute for the summer of '94 with Instructions either in music, art, literature, elocution, oratory or shorthand and type-writing.THIRD PREMIUM.For the three children over nine years of age, first obtaining fifty subscribers for us, a years instruction on piano. This is for beginners.FOURTH PREMIUM.To all contestants failing to gain the premiums we will give a commission of twenty-five per cent.The Boston Training School of Music makes a specialty of the training of teachers of music, it is a school of the highest grade and for these reasons and because this school has made no distinction on account of race, the management of this paper has selected it for its premium offer. The number of young people who come to Boston for a musical education increases yearly; through these premiums it is hoped to give a helping hand to worthy aspirants.A course in piano, voice, violin, theory or harmony and counter point at the finest school of its kind in the country.For further particulars address the WOMAN'S ERA, 108 Charles St., Boston.ADVERTISE IN THE WOMAN'S ERA THE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTEREST OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.The WOMAN'S ERA, as the organ of the colored women's clubs, has a large circulation in many of the large cities, notably Boston, New Bedford, Providence, New York, Chicago, Washington and Kansas City.The Literary, Musical, and Domestic Departments are under the control of competent writers and critics.With its large circulation among women, and particularly among women of the refined and educated classes, it offers peculiar advantages to advertisers of household articles, wearing apparel, books, magazines, musical instruments, and so forth.Its rates are exceedingly liberal.Try it, and you will not regret it.EDITORIALS.THE CONVENTION.Many of the letters upon the proposed convention have been necessarily deferred until next month; our paper was obliged to go to press much earlier than was anticipated, and much matter of interest arrived too late. However, we call attention to an able and interesting letter on the subject by Mrs. Fannie Williams of Chicago. Mrs. Williams' mind and ability are well-known in Washington and Boston, where she formerly lived, and her letter will have great weight with people of those cities as well as with those of the West, with whom she has lived of late years.Mrs. Williams advises us not to be in a hurry and the advice is timely. A lady of Boston said apropos of holding a convention: "I really do not know what to say as to time. I believe the summer to be the only proper time, but I think this summer too early and next summer too late."Doubtless many think with her of the advantages of the great good in many ways that would result from the coming together of our women, there can be no doubt, but when and where is a question that must be considered carefully. We want it to be representative and national--we must avoid being either precipitate or careless. Our convention must be the whole-souled expression of our earnest women of all sections, and must be backed by all our women, let us agitate and prepare.OUR YOUNG MEN IN BUSINESS.The publishers of the WOMAN'S ERA take especial pride in the advertisements found in this paper; in most cases they are of firms of young colored men. This is especially true of the last page, which represents flourishing businesses conducted by our young men, which are a standing refutation to the fallacious charge that the young colored men of the North are seldom engaged in any but menial occupations. Every little while some one with little knowledge of the situation, and filled with sectional feeling (which should never be encouraged) goes into spasm over the dark prospect before our young men. Our young men, as a general thing, have had the good sense not to fan the flame of sectional feeling, and have been content to let intelligent people judge for themselves. The WOMAN'S ERA does not pretend to advertise all the young men in business (it devoutly wishes that it could), but it has been so readily and cheerfully supported by the young men that it is glad of the opportunity to speak for them all.The WOMAN'S ERA is a woman's paper, but it is such a true woman's paper that it is intensely interested in man and all that he does.The attention of our readers is called to the open letter to Mrs. Chant printed in our Club_News. It seems to us that it is in this direction that our women find a great field of work. America stands impotent and Europe amazed at the barbarous state of affairs in the southern states of America. The protestations of black men have in most cases fallen flat and almost unnoticed. Is it not possible it has been left to black women to bring about the moral reform so urgently needed. Let our women's clubs turn their thoughts and bend their energies towards this work. The letter to Mrs. Chant has received wide consideration, and if it did no more than to call attention to the position of the colored women of the country it would not be in vain. We believe it has struck where many protests have been unnoticed.NOTES.Among the contestants for the first premium prize offered by this paper, is a young woman of New Bedford, the possessor of an exceptionally fine voice, but who as yet has been unable to begin any training or cultivation of it. The offer to her is a rare opportunity. Two children have already entered the contest for the children's prizes. There is still a chance for two more and each get the prize--a year's musical training free.Miss Marie Louise Burgess, who contributes the notes on "The Nursing of Sick Children," is a New England girl who is now located as a professional nurse at Hampton Institute. Miss Burgess graduated from N.E. Woman's Hospital Training School for Nurses, and has entered her chosen field with enthusiasm and success. She will shortly publish a small book of short stories.The "Pop" concerts are on the top wave of success, and are the severest form of dissipation Bostonians have ever digested. Still some do not digest even yet, but endeavor to impress the onlooker that they are wildly hilarious while drinking beer and listening to a Strauss waltz.The annual business meeting of the Cecilia occurred May 24th, at Steinert Hall. After the meeting came a reception, music and a collation. Enough, to subdue the stoutest heart.Miss Laura Robinson will graduate from the Boston Training School of Music this spring. Without doubt Miss Robinson has the "divine afflatus"; this has been supplemented by fine training and there is a future before her.Every month brings news of more women roused by the account of what other women are doing through organization to form a club of their own. The newest club to be represented by a letter to the ERA, is the "Soujourner Truth," of Providence, R. I. An account of its formation is given elsewhere.Miss Gould, of the Woman's Era Club, brought before the members, at a recent meeting, a letter received from one of the sufferers of the Sea Islands flood. By this letter it is shown that in the distribution of money, food and clothes which had been sent the sufferers, Clara Barton's agents required that all colored people should work for rations, while nothing was required from white people in exchange. Miss Gould was requested by the President to make full inquiries in the hope of getting accurate and definite replies. This was done, and in the answer received the facts were reiterated, with names, dates and places. An investigation is being made at this end among workers for the sufferers, and it has been found that the Citizens Relief Association of Boston (colored, Mrs. Hannah Smith, secretary,) has now in hand quite a large sum which they have withheld because of the report that much sent by them has not been justly distributed. From Mrs. Christiansen, the wife of one of the leading merchants of Beaufort, and who has been instrumental in raising large sums in Boston and vicinity, it was found that while contributions sent through them had been distributed freely, without asking anything in return, other agents had and do require work from colored people and not from white.The Club still has the matter under consideration and also some method of aiding the suffering who are still sadly in need of help.Ladies of Norfolk and Berkeley, Va., are planning a Carnival modelledmodeled after that given by the Boston Club.Hampton is planning a woman's club. It is safe to say that such an organization there would be carried on with Intelligence and enthusiasm.Doubtless there were colored delegates to the Working Girls Convention recently held in Boston. Two young ladies of Philadelphia, school teachers, were reported as possible delegates. Whether or not they were present has not been ascertained. It is very easy for colored people to be "lost" in Boston as they can be in no other city.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 3. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era. For every kind of
PRINTING
GO TO
CHAS. ALEXANDER,
Publisher of
THE MONTHLY REVIEW,
36 Columbus Avenue, Boston.
This Journal is printed on the Monthly Review Press.LITERATURE.Medora W. GouldMEDORA W. GOULD.During this month of "perfect days," probably no poet will be called to mind more often than Lowell, who, in his Vision of Sir Launfal, has so well expressed what everyone feels but few can say. It is strange how trite and commonplace our most extravagant phrases sound in attempt to describe these incomparable June mornings.Miss E.F. Andrews in the Chautauquan for May, calls attention to the fact that throughout all fiction, aside ftomfrom five ideal characters of Shakespeare, there is not a mother who is an admirable character. This, she says, is the fault of the women themselves, who were content with too low a standard, and who did not claim the culture which men looked upon as their exclusive right. Formerly women were educated with a view to marriage only, and having become married, made no further effort in the line of self-culture. It was also fashionable and a sign of good breathing to have ill-health and to be very dependent. The women of the new school, she continues, hold a different view of life, believing it the duty of the wife and mother to keep in touch with the world about her, and to represent the hightesthighest 
culture attainable. They hold that daughters should be educated more with the idea of making good wives and mothers; that they should be taught to value health; should know something of business, and be able to earn their own living, even if not obliged to do so.Just at present considerable interest is manifested in the events immediately preceding the Civil War. So many of those who took part in the great struggle are passing away, or, still living, are giving to the public their reminiscences of the thrilling scenes through which they have passed. Thomas Ewing, in the Cosmopolitan for May, tells his story of the struggle for freedom in Kansas, giving sketches of the leaders on both sides, and fhethe plans and purposes of John Brown.An amusing little anecdote is told of the poet Tennyson, who, it will be remembered, gloried in his disregard for the minor conventionalities of life, quite the contrary to the exquisite courtesy and high breeding of Longfellow. 0n one occasion, at a dinner-party, he rested his feet on the table, and maintained his position in spite of the indignant protests of his friends. At length someone remarked jocularly, that he might be taken for Longfellow. Down came the feet instantly, nor did they again resume the position supposed to be characteristic of Americans.It is pleasant to note that many of our old authors are still at work. It is so long since they became famous that we are apt to think of them as having ceased their labors. Oliver Wendall Holmes, although eighty-five years of age, still writes, and shows no sign of failing powers. Mrs. Henry Ward Beecher, at the age of eighty-one, sits for hours at her desk daily. Edward Everett Hale, at seventy-two, does much more work than many a young man. Thomas Wentworth Higginson, at seventy-five, works hard and steadily. William Wetmore Story, at seventy-five, is in Rome, writing a series of magazine articles. Mrs. Julia Ward Howe, also seventy-five, not only writes, but travels, and delivers lectures at intervals.Although many years have passed since the assassination of President Lincoln, it was an event of so great importance, that it is worthy of the closest study. Of late there has been a revival of efforts to prove one of the guilty parties innocent; therefore it seemed a fitting time to Mr. T.M. Harris, a member of the military commission who tried the conspirators, to give to the public a concise history of the great event, founded upon the evidence produced in the trial. This he has done in a volume entitled "The Assassination of Lincoln, a History of the Great Conspiracy." The matter is arranged in the form of an interesting narrative, and fills a good sized and handsomely bound volume. It is published by the American Citizen Company.The American Citizen Company also publishes a book by J. Robert Love, M.D., of Port Au Prince, Hayti, called "The Indictment, the Testimony, and Verdict, or Proofs, that Romanism is not Christianity."Mr. W.D. Howells begins in Harper's for May, an account of his first visit to New England. He gives a sketch of his acquaintance with Bayard Taylor, whom he met on this trip, and tells of his disappointment in seeing the ocean for the first time while at Portland, which he visited on account of its being the birthplace of Longfellow. We will all he glad to know his impressions of Boston.Captain King, who, in "Between the Lines," is said to have given the best description of a battle that has ever been given in the English language, has written a book called "Cadet Days," which all young men with military inclinations will find interesting. In his previous books he has shown us what soldiers are and what they can do, and he now tells us how soldiers are made. Captain King is a graduate of West Point, and although not the hero of his tale, is part of it.Of the making of dictionaries there seems to be no end; and since all of the new ones are equally up to date and replete with information, there is little choice among them. Yet the "Standard," published by Funk and Wagnalls, New York, has one especial feature which recommends it to everyone. The definition is placed immediately after the word, and the eye is saved the trouble of looking through the derivations and authorities.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 3. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.THE
Great Historical Book
OF THE PRESENT TIME.
The Assassination of
LINCOLN,
By GEN. T. M. HARRIS.
A member of the Commission which tried the Assassins
Should be in every Household. 
PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED. 
Price in cloth, $2.50; hall Morocco, $3.50; full Morocco, $5.00.American Citizen Co.
7 Bromfeld St., Boston.SOCIAL NEWS.Irene de Motie and Marion RidleyIRENE DE MOTIE--MARION RIDLEY.The Calanthe Whist Club of Cambridge celebrated their first anniversary on May 11 by a dance. A very enjoyable evening was spent, and supper was served at Young's. The prize winners were, ladies prizes: first, Mrs. G.W. Lewis; second, Mrs. J.B. Young; booby, Miss Evelyn Coburn. Gentlemen's prizes: first, Mr. G.W. Lewis; second, Mr. G.B. Saturn: booby, Mr. J.T. Lewis. The officers of the club are Mr. J.R. Young, Mr. W.W. Taylor, Mr. N.G. Mitchell, Miss E.M. Clary, Miss M.E. Johnson, Mrs. G.N. Lewis.It is said that the next three months will witness many weddings among well-known people. Mr. Frank Smith of Brooklyn, N.Y., will marry a Philadelphia girl; Mr. William Warwick, of Philadelphia will marry Miss Smith of Brooklyn, sister to Mr. Frank Smith. Thus will these two cities make a fair exchange.Brooklyn girls seem to be in demand. Mr. Cranston Lee of New Bedford has selected one to grace his home in New Bedford.Mrs. J.H. Lewis of Boston will leave for Hampton, Va., in July, to be present at the marriage of her sister, Miss Peake, which will take place in August.Mr. John Guinn of New Bedford. who married Miss Elmira Brady of Boston, has recently purchased a very fine house in the first named city, into which they will move in the fall.Mrs. Martha Magill, advertising agent for the WOMAN ERA, Will spend the summer in Saratoga. She leaves Boston for that town the latter part of June, with her three little children.Among the many bequests of the late Mrs. Mary Hemenway, was that of a sum of money to Mr. Lewis Terry of Gayhead street, Roxbury.Miss Elizabeth Johnson, editor of the "Women at Home" department, is recuperating at Lenox, Mass. Besides being a bright and exceptionally well-read young woman, Miss Johnson is an expert stenographer and type-writer, and holds a fine position. She is at present under doctor's orders to do no "head-work." E.E. Brown, Esq., has recently purchased his pretty home in the Highlands, and made it over to his wife. Mr. and Mrs. Brown are expecting distinguished guests this summer, and it is probable they will entertain in more than their usual hospitable style.Mr. and Mrs. Robert H. Terrell of Washington, D. C.. are expected to spend the month of August in Boston.It is currently reported that Mr. Wright N. Cuney of Galveston, Texas, father of Miss Maud Cuney, now in Boston, will run for congress from his district, with a large chance for success.It is said that Mrs. John R. Lynch and her daughter. Alice, will sail for Europe this month.The marriage ceremony of Mr. Andrew James of Hampton, Va., to Miss Louise Toliver, of Washington, D. C., was solemnized by Rev. P.J. Smith on Wednesday eve, May 2, at the residence of Mr. and Mrs. George Cranford, N. Hampton street. The bride was attired in a handsome costume of imported swan, and carried a bouquet of white roses. The groom wore the conventional suit of black. The presents were numerous and costly. Mr. and Mrs. James left on the following Saturday for their future home, Hampton, where he has erected a fine house as a present to the bride.A reception was tendered Dr. I. L. Roberts by Mr. and Mrs. John Swain on Monday eve, May 14, at 13 Dorchester street. Dr. Roberts graduated from the Leonard Medical College at Raleigh, N. C., March 21, with great honors. He was valedictorian of the class and also won three of the highest prizes. During the evening the Doctor was presented with a set of the following instruments: an aspirator, trocar and cannula. He explained the use of these instruments in a neat little speech, which was very interesting.It is reported that Newport will be unusually gay this season. Among the visitors promised are Miss Theodora Lee from Chicago, Miss Seales of Cleveland, Miss Bessie Mitchell of New Bedford, Mr. Fred Dickerson and friends from Washington.Miss Maria Hale of Augusta, Ga., whose brother, Mr. Harry Hale, is now in Boston, is expected to join him here next week.Mr. and Mrs. W. 0. Goodell and daughter of Chelsea, expect to summer in Maine.Bicycling is becoming more and more popular in Boston. The Misses Grant, Miss Mamie Lewis and several others have recently purchased wheels and are becoming expert riders.The concert given in Providence Thursday, May 17, by Mr. Harry Burleigh, of the National Conservatory, New York, who was assisted by Miss Maud Cuney, Mr. Edward Glover and others, was not successful.The young people of Richmond, Va., have organized a society known as the Ciceronian Musical and Literary Society. The officers are, presdentpresident, Harrison Holmes, vice-president, John Harris ; Secretary, Wallace Christian; treasurer, Antonette Turner.Miss Ella Smith is expected in Boston next week from Washington on her way to her home in Newport, where she will spend the summer.Mr. Robert Carter spent a day in Boston enroute to Chicopee, Mass., where he has been appointed assistant surgeon in the Chicopee hospital. He was heartily received by his Boston friends.Miss Lillian A. Lewis, who was to have gone to Philadelphia to the Women's Conference, was unfortunately prevented by a severe attack of tonsilitis. She has fully recovered.Rev. Oscar Lieber Mitchell, who graduates from the Episcopal Theological school in Campridge June 20, has accepted a call to St. Mary's church in Washington, D.C. He will assume charge of the parish the first Sunday in June.Joseph R. Paige, the third son of Mr. and Mrs. R. G. L. Paige, of Berkeley, Va., graduated from the Norfolk Mission College on May 16, and will come to Boston to enter Harvard in the autumn.The Cecelia Club closed a most

brilliant season with their yearly private reception and musical on Thursday evening, May 24, on which occasion Mr. George L. Ruffin was one of the few soloists selected to entertain the club. Mrs. Adelaide Smith Terry and Mr. Ruffin are as yet the only colored members of this very large and celebrated musical association.The bequest of $5000 under the will of the late Harriet Hayden to Harvard University to found a scholarship for the benefit of poor and deserving colored students, has been paid into the treasury of the university; the scholarship has been established and will be ready for some colored student next fall. By the terms of the will a medical student is to have the preference over all others.CHATS WITH GIRLS.Leslie WilmotDEAR GIRLS:I was the recipient of the following letter last week:Dear Leslie Wilmot:I read your 'chat with girls' every month, but I don't like the books you suggest. Can't you tell about some books for little girls? All your books are for big ones. I am twelve years old and I like to read very much. Yours truly,CLARA DAY.So this letter will be to little girls, and although many of the older ones may find something to interest them in it.First, every girl knows Louise M. Alcott and her works, for "Little Women, "Old Fashioned Girl," and "Little Men" are household words among girls, but possibly they do not know that "Work," "Hospital Sketches," and others are just as interesting, and add to that "Louise Alcott's Life," a record of a thoroughly unselfish, helpful one. One little incident of her kindness and thoughtfulness was never published, I think.Once a woman happened to be sitting side of her in a crowded car, reading a novel. Accidentally she dropped it. and Miss Alcott returned it to her and entered into conversation with her on the merits of novel reading. The woman said she read novels for amusement, finding, as she grew older that she did not care for books that made her think. Miss Alcott rather agreed with her, but thought that books might be read that would combine both instruction and amusement. A few days later this woman's heart was made glad by a box of old magazines and books, accompanied by a note signed "Louise M. Alcott.""Three Generations," by Janet Rose, is a fine story of colonial days, and Mary Mapes Dodge has written a number of stories for children. One, "Hans Brinker," is a pretty story of child life in Holland. I wonder if any of my girls read Vancy's books. They were quite popular some.Tears ago, and I think no girl could help feeling better, and that she could lead a more unselfish life and do some good to others after perusing these books. Mrs. A. D. Whitney's "Real Folks" is worth reading, so is Mrs. Burnett's "Louisiana," and scores of others I might mention.Charlotte Yonge, an English writer, has written many books for young girls. "The Chaplet of Pearls" gives a quaint description of the times of the French revolution; "The Queen's Four Maries" tells of the stormy days of Scottish history; "The Pupils of St. John" is a narrative of the early Christian church; "Pigeon Pie" is a child's account of Charles I's reign.William Ware's "Zenobia" would perhaps interest older readers. Girls, read the Arabian Nights now, for a few years hence, you will not be able to enjoy it.Yours, LESLIE WILMOT.Victoria EarlyThrough the large-hearted courtesy of Rev. W.B. Derrick, the Woman's Loyal Union of Now York and Brooklyn have as a permanent place of meeting his cheerful rooms in the Bible house, New York, free of charge. This is a decided step forward for the Union, and its members and well wishers are greatly encouraged, for like most experimental associations, the W.L.U. began its existence minus a treasury, and though they have the nucleus of one, yet the chief effort of the newly-revised constitution is in the direction of creating a treasury they began work on the principle that each member be taxed pro rata for all expenses incurred, but, experience has proven beyond a doubt the utter fallacy of such a system, for rarely does it happen that more than one-quarter of the members attend, generally, consequently a faithful few bear the burden that would be but a trifle if every member thoughtfully bore her part. It is expected that quite a nice showing will be made by the W.L.U. Relief Fund, formed during the severe stringency of the early winter. Under the guidance of Mrs. J.E. Garned and Miss S.E. Frazier a number of children have been provided with warm, neatly repaired garments; the Union also subscribed the sum of ten dollars in aid of the Chyenne sufferers in South Carolina.A number of ladies are agitating the question of the employment of our girls in stores and various commercial establishments, etc., which led to the question, are young girls of the race at this present time truly anxious and ambitious for such a crusade?--If anxious, are they ready?--in their accomplishments do they consider Commercial requirements? Those and many questions of like nature deluge the mind when the subject is broached. There is a determination among the members of the W. L. U. to push this matter, providing, of course, the young women give the needed impetus. Without reliable material the most zealous efforts will fail, because no business man will employ a girl just because she is colored, and ought to have a chance. She must be able to fill the position desired. Among other needed reforms, there is one connected with the colored home which has been brought before the W. L. U. and steps taken preliminary to action in the matter.The women here like the WOMAN'S ERA, and when 'tis generally circulated will become a decided favorite. The very fact that 'tis a woman's paper all the way through will after a little time form a striking plea for the sympathy of thoughtful women. We certainly need a common medium for the exchange of ideas and could not hope for one more dignified in matter or elegant in appearance than the WOMANS' ERA.VICTORIA EARLY.MUSIC AND DRAMA.Mr. Sidney Woodward presented the Cantata of Belshazzar at the People's church on the evening of May 16. A good sized audience was in attendance, and gave generous evidence of their appreciation by applauding. The cantata was under the direction of Mr. Woodward, who obtained excellent results from the assisting artists. Mr. Harry Burleigh of New York came on especially to take one of the roles, but was not up to his best form. We have heard him achieve better results. Mr. Woodward made a particularly painstaking effort, and met with his usual success. The other local artists gave their best effort to make the cantata a very pleasing evening's entertainment.Black Patti has appeared at the People's church, May 29, just as we are going to press, under the management of Miss Nahar.Our white Patti began before the memory of mortal man (that is, this man) and like the brook, promises to "go on forever." Of late years has appeared the "Black Patti," and now comes the "Creole Patti," the latest up to date. Next.APOLOGISTS FOR LYNCHING.The murderers of colored men at the South, who lynch their victims without giving them an opportunity to be heard, denying a trial in the courts presided over by the friends and sympathizers of the murderers, begin to feel the force of public opinion, and find it necessary to give an excuse for shooting down men at sight without a warning, for hanging boys and riddling their dead bodies with bullets, and for burning men and women at the stake."No Negro domination," was the only excuse offered by the preachers, teachers, judges, law officers and "best blood of the South," who composed the Ku Klux Klans. When this was worn thread-bare, it was followed by "This is a white man's government, and the white man will rule it, right or wrong." Election after election was carried with this slogan. The ballot box was a sham and a delusion. One by one the Negro saw the promises of the government to protect him and secure to him his rights as a citizen broken. He has appealed without avail for the right to live. His record as a gallant soldier in defence of the Union, his record as a law-abiding citizen have counted for naught. He was enslaved for more than two hundred years and robbed of his labor, beaten and bruised, his wife and children sold away from him, his women robbed of virtue and honor by the enslavers, and now that the English press, aroused by a Negro woman fleeing from the hand of the lyncher, dares speak out and denounce murder and the murderers, these lynchers, who have never spared the honor and virtue of Negro women, whose hands are dripping with Blood of their own illegitimate children, confident of protection from American public opinion, feel it necessary to offer a new excuse for their crimes when called to book by public opinion abroad. Up to their ears in guilt against Negro women, they offer as their excuse for murdering Negro men, Negro women and Negro children, that white women are not safe from the Negro rapist. And for these murderers, lynchers and burners, for these latter-day saints, who preyed for two and a half centuries on their helpless slave women, we are told that Francis Willard of America. and Laura Ormiston Chant of England, have entered the list as apologists. These two fearless defenders of the right would let no liquor dealer escape, but would apologize for the white criminal, if the victim be Negro man, woman or child. The man, white or black, who assaults women, should be apprehended and punished by imprisonment or death, if such be the decree of the law. For such men no excuse is to be made. But it is the duty of the law, and not of the mob to inflict this punishment. And every man, of whatever crime charged, has the right of a fair trial in the courts. All that is asked is that the law reign, and not the mob.In ten years 800 Negroes have been murdered by mobs at the South. Of these 800 only 269, about one-third have even been charged with the crime of outrage. Investigation has proven many of these 269 groundless charges, and in those with some show of truth, the women have been proven to be as bad as the Negro men, and that they made the charges only after being detected in living improperly with the men. If this charge is true, if Negro men are given to assaults upon white women, why do not they attempt the crime in the North where the courts would give them a fair trial? Why do they confine the attempt to the South, where the mere charge is sure death, and no opportunity is given for a trial? Why did not the slaves, when their masters were away trying to shoot the Union to death and keep them forever slaves, outrage the wives and daughters of these traitors confided to their care?No! the charge is not true. It is no justification. It is an infamous crime against the only law-abiding people at the South. The lynchers are Murderers. Their apologists must share their condemnation, and if by influencing public opinion against stopping lynching, they must share the odium of abbettors of murder.HON FREDERICK DOUGLASS IN BOSTON.The announcement of the coming to Boston of Frederick Douglass was the signal that called together once more about all that remains of the old anti-slavery party. From all parts of New England they came to his lecture at the People's Church on May 10, to have their old-time enthusiasm aroused by his still fiery eloquence in the cause of humanity. And when at the close he turned and took each old friend and co-worker by the hand, and tremulously told of their fidelity to principle when it cost something to advocate the cause of the oppressed, it was grandly pathetic and seemed like a benediction. On the afternoon of thu day preceding the lecture, a reception was tendered Mr. Douglass, by the Massachusetts Woman Suffrage Association, and the "remnant" was all there. Mrs. Mary A. Livermore stood to receive with Mr. Douglass a lively throng of Boston's best in literature, art and philanthropy. Among them there were the venerable Dr. Bartol and his artist daughter, Col. Higginson, the Garrison brothers, the Allen families of West Newton and Cambridge, Lieut. and Mrs. Charles L. Mitchell, Hon. Henry C. and Miss Blackwell. Miss Maria S. Porter, Mr. Charles Lenox, and a host of others. On the morning of his last day in Boston Mr. Douglass, on invitation of Representative Teamoh, visited the Mass. State Legislature; both branches of that body adjourned while he was introduced to and addressed the members. Several attempts to entertain the distinguished guest by private parties were frustrated by his early departure from the city.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 3. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ATLANTA, GA.
REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D. D. President.
THIS Institution trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedom of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions from those who are willing to help towards their education. Write to the President.BOSTON TRAINING SCHOOL OF MUSICINCORPORATED
Vocal and Instrumental Music,
Harmony, Theory and Composition.
Pupils thoroughly Prepared for Teaching and Public Performance.
Central Location. CATALOGUE FREE.
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M., Director,
Music Hall Building, Boston, Mass.WHY YOU SHOULD SUBSCRIBE TO THE WOMAN'S ERA.Because it represents the best thought and work of the most advanced women of your race, and should therefore interest you.
Because it will keep you informed on matters you cannot afford to be ignorant of.
Because being a woman's movement, it is bound to succeed.
Because it is readable, it contains sixteen pages of solid matter, no plate matter, reprints, no filling up with headings and leads.
Because its subscription price is only one dollar a year.MUSICAL INSTRUCTION
JULY AND AUGUST.Summer School of Music
IN THE
Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute,
COTTAGE CITY. MASS.Four hundred to seven hundred students each season. Lessons in Piano, (practise Clavier Method), Singing, Harmony, Counterpoint and Musical Composition.Regular Course in Literature, Science and Art.A strong faculty of Eminent Teachers.ADDRESS,
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M,, Director of Boston Training School of Music.
20 Music Hall Building,
BOSTON, - MASS.BOSTON
Condensed Milk Co.'s
Plain condensed (unsweetened) Milk Is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. Sold in jars at the office, 2 1/2 Park Sq., Boston. Delivered three times per week.
ENDORSEMENT.
I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak, puny baby into a strong, plump one, after all other foods had failed.
MRS. MCGILL.
10 Lindall Place, Boston.F. S. BUTLER, Practical Tailor,
84 Mason St., Room 4, Boston. 
Ladies' and Gent's Clothing Cleansed Dyed, Repaired and Altered.MISS R. A. SMITH, Fashionable Dressmaker,
Orders promptly executed. All work guaranteed.
37 Anderson St., - Boston.Madame S. G. IRVEN'S FASHIONABLE
DRESSMAKING PARLORS,
KANSAS CITY, MO.
Colored Women's League, 1027 Charlotte St.HENRY YOUNG, Clothing Cleansed Dyed and Repaired,
ALTERED AND PRESSED.
No. 9 City Hall Ave., Boston, Mass.
All orders promptly attended to.HOUSEWIVES
Buy your Kerosene Oil and get the best water white oil off
C. H. YANCEY & BROTHERS, 
34 Kendall Street, Boston Mass.
Drop us a postal card, and we will call.
Because of the superior quality of this oil many members of the W. E. have pledged themselves to patronize these dealers.DR. R.B. CALLAWAY, DENTIST,
333 Tremont Street,  Boston.
OFFICE HOURS
9 A.M. to 1 P.M., and 1.30  to 6 P.M.Use Dr. Callaway's Saponaceous Tooth Powder. Price 25 Cents.M.D. JONES & CO.
REMOVED TO
368 WASHINGTON ST.,  BOSTON.
Cemetery Requisites
Decoration Day Supplies
Send for illustrated price listMCKENZIE & SMALLWOOD,
DEALERS IN
FINE : FOOTWEAR
OF ALL KINDS.
We also have with us Mr. PEGRAM, a first class shoemaker. Repairing neatly done. Also shoes made to order.
145 Cambridge St., Boston.LESSONS BY MAIL.
Instruction in English composition, grammar, use of capitals, punctuation, formation of sentences, etc. Address, Miss M. W. GOULD,
Box 165, Readville. Mass.PRIVATE BOARD.
MISS ELIZABETH E. COOLEY, will accomodateaccommodate a few select boarders for the summer. TrancientTransient and permanent.AT 62 PHILLIPS ST., BOSTON.E.M. ALLEN, TAILOR,Gent's Clothing Made, Altered, Cleansed and Repaired in the neatest manner, at short notice. Terms reasonable.No. 11 City Hall. Ave., Boston.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 3. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.DO YOU WANT
TO OWN YOUR OWN HOME?
THEN READ THIS!IF YOU WANT TO BUY A HOUSE IN CAMBRIDGE, SOMERVILLE, DORCHESTER OR EVERETT . . . IT WILL PAY YOU TO CALL ONBALDWIN & DORSEY, Real Estate, Mortgage and Insurance Brokers,They make a specialty of property in the suburbs.
They furnish purchase money at low rates of interest.
They will lend you money to build a house on your own land.Stop! Pay no more Rent!  Begin now to buy your own home!BALDWIN & DORSEY, 
Real Estate, Mortgages and Insurance,
555 MAIN STREET,  CAMBRIDGEPORT.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
OF BOSTON Street Railway Builders and Contractors for Public Works.ESTIMATES MADE FOR A COMPLETE UNDERGROUND SYSTEM.GEO. S. BARNES. President.
STANLEY RUFFIN, Sec'y and Treas.
34 School Street, Boston.J.P. BOND & CO.
Gentlemen's Furnishing Goods,
Shirts, Cuffs and Collars.
Business and Dress Shirts, $1 .00 and $ 1.50--Best Value. Cheviots, Percales,
and Fancy Shirts, 75c. to $2.00. 
Nice line of Hosiery and Underwear, Handkerchiefs, etc. Neckwear, 50c.
141 Dartmouth Street, - BOSTON.
DARTMOUTH LAUNDRY.The Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 4.BOSTON, MASS., JULY., 1894, PRICE 10 CENTS.THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the National Federation of Afro-American Women, and devoted to the Interests of the Women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country.Published monthly, in Boston, by JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, Editors and Publishers.SPECIAL CONTRIBUTORS.Medora W. Gould    Leslie WilmotMarion Ridley      Irene DeMortie    M. Elizabeth Johnson.SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Club Rates, one hundred copies,   -    7.00Subscriptions Payable in Advance.CHICAGO.Frances A. LewisMrs. R.E. Moore, President of Woman's Club, Chicago, was born in Missouri. At an early age she was brought by relatives to Chicago. Having finished the prescribed course of the grammar schools of this city, the same old story was whispered into willing ears and she became Mrs. Richard E. Moore. When a school-girl she was noted for her quiet unassuming manners and sympathetic nature which, as she grew older, became more marked, and has preeminently fitted her for the various positions she has been called upon to occupy. Her husband being one of the most prominent "Masons" in the country, she has taken an active part in the O. E. S.; its high intellectual and moral teachings finding in her a staunch supporter. When Mrs. Frances E. Harper was in Chicago during the "Worlds Fair," seeing the wide field for work, at her suggestion a meeting of the representative women of the city was called to consider the possibilities of concerted action for influence in elevating and assisting in Race-Work throughout the country, which call was met with universal approval, out of which was evolved the "Woman's Club of Chicago," with Mrs. John Jones, Pres., Miss Ida B. Wells, Vice-Pres. Upon Mrs. Jones resigning Miss Wells still continued the meetings, acting as President. Miss Wells being called upon to fill an engagement in England whereupon Mrs. Moore was unanimously Chosen to be acting President until the return of Miss Wells. When Mrs. Moore assumed the Office of President, the "Club" had only a preamble, setting forth a general statement of the purposes of the Club but no rules for government, and as the Club had passed into permanent organization, Mrs. Moore immediately began setting about getting the workings of the Club into a systematic condition; the result was a Constitution and By-laws, also a petition to the State to be incorporated which was granted; the Constitution and by-laws although brief are Concise in their character. On the return of Miss Wells from England Mrs. Moore will resign the Presidency of the Club, but will still continue to assist in any capacity which will be most beneficial. By her sympathies for the oppressed, pride of race, and zeal in work for all that is elevating she has won the lasting admiration of The Woman's Club of Chicago.FRANCES A. LEWIS.NEWS FROM THE CLUBS.LAWRENCE, Kan. May 21, 1894.Mrs. S.H. JohnsonThis interesting little city is nearly half way between Topeka and the two Kansas Cities, having all the advantages of a suburban town, and has gained for itself the title "Athens of the West." To be in Lawrence at once means to be in the midst of comforts, pleasure and intelligence. We may truly say that what Boston is to the East, Lawrence is to the West. Being the scene of much bloodshed during the early days of Kansas, the history of Lawrence is really the history of Kansas. It is the seat of the Kansas State University and has it splendid School system, with a high school that prepares pupils for the University. We have very fine churches, --visitors have jocularly remarked that every other house was either a Church or Schoolhouse. While that is not quite true, we can boast of more schools and Churches than is customary for a place so small.From this fact, one Can see that Club life would be one of the prominent features of social life in this city. For a long time the "Progressive Club", composed of graduates from High School and University students, was the only club. It meets the first Thursday in every month and is entirely literary in its work; at its meetings light refreshments are served and during this time many of the problems of the time are discussed. Its members are chiefly young people, married and single, male and female. Next follows the "Eureka"--the fortnightly club. It is a social Club; it aims to give its

member's recreation--an impromptu programme being rendered every other meeting. This club is for married people. "A. V. C." is our young ladies' club; and "Sierra Leone" for mothers. These are the outgrowth of the "Progressive." In all of these clubs women play a conspicuous part. The "Eureka" Club serves refreshments once a month--the last Monday night. After reading the article written on "Social Etiquette" in your Women at Home Department, it might be interesting to other women to know that we members of the "Sierra Leone" felt the need of a social reform in the matter of calls and could see the utter impracticability of persons "dropping in" at any time; we have set aside Thursday afternoon of each week as our receiving day. Each lady then expects calls and is prepared to receive them. Many are the little afternoon teas and luncheons and picnics and dainty breakfasts given in our town--all of which help to make Lawrence a pleasant place to visit.During Commencement Week all the clubs contribute and have a grand banquet for our High School graduates and visitors.I have tried to make our sisters acquainted with our social life and will say that Mrs. W. W. Johnson opened the social season June 2 by an entertainment given in honor of her friend, Mrs. C. H. J. Taylor, and her daughter, Mrs. Judge I. T. Bradley--both from Kansas City, Kansas.Mrs. S.H. JOHNSON,Pres. Sierra Leone Club.NORFOLK, Va.A.E. TuckerThis Union has been organized for about six years, with Mrs. A. Dawley as its president. During all this time our meetings have not been well attended as regularly as they might have been. One of our disadvantages was our inability for quite a while to get an hour and day which would be convenient to all. We are glad to state that we have at last succeeded. We tried some afternoon in the week, and met with comparatively no success. We changed from that to Sunday afternoon at 4 o'clock. We are gratified with the results of this change. Our meetings are now well attended by both ladies and gentlemen. Our motto is: "For God and home and native land." We have some one make an address on some temperance topic each Sabbath afternoon and then a general discussion follows, interspersed with good singing. We hamittees for practical workall clases of people. The mhip fee for ladies is 50 cer gentlemen, $1.00. This  the purpose of purchasinerance literature, etc. We aing to lead many, by examabstain from liquor in all fOn every hand we see the n with all its alluremengaudy attractions. Is there not, then, work for and need of such an organization? Will you help spread the banner of Temperance?(Miss) A.E. TUCKER,Secretary.Ladies' Auxiliary of the (Colored) Y. M. C. A. of Norfolk, Va. Rosa L. JessupActuated by a desire to promote the work of the Young Men's Christian Association, and having been requested to do so by the Board of Directors, a number of earnest, Christian young women met Feb. 7, 1888, and organized the "Ladies' Auxiliary" of the (Colored) Young Men's Christian Association of Norfolk, Va.No member of the Auxiliary is allowed to entertain young men at her home while any important meeting of the Association is being held, or any public entertainment for its benefit is in progress.This has led many young men to connect themselves with the organization and to materially assist in carrying on the good work.Literary and social entertainments are given by the Auxiliary every month. These are attended by the young men, who are made to feel that the ladies are interested in them, socially, morally, mentally and spiritually.Every Christmas a "Children's Dinner" is given by the Auxiliary, the members of which donate the necessaries, or secure them, and the many little ones, who ordinarily have no Christmas joys, are made glad by the good cheer provided.The Auxiliary has given to the Young Men's Christian Association a library Containing five hundred volumes, all within the past two years, and has rendered other assistance of a practical character to the work among the Colored people of this City.The Auxiliary meets twice each month and at each meeting a Bible reading is given by the general secretary of the Y. M. C. A after which general business is transacted.The Auxiliary is non-sectarian and thoroughly represents the Christian young women of this city. Its work is noble and elevating and the results attained within the past six years have been highly gratifying to all concerned.Very truly,(Miss) ROSA L. JESSUP,President.Norfolk, Va.The Women's Working Club of Berkley, Va., held a six days' carnival the latter part of May which was successful in every way. Mrs. R. G. L. Paige, president of

the club, using the Women's Era carnival as it model, carried out the project with enthusiasm and energy. The carnival opened with a reception to the clergy; on Tuesday Mrs. Jarley's Wax Works were given; Wednesday was devoted to literary exercises and a spelling match; Thursday a necktie and apron party; Friday a promenade; Saturday an auction of the fancy articles on sale was held.Nothing of the kind has ever been given at Berkley before and its success was instantaneous and complete.Anything concerning Hampton Institute is always in demand. The following interesting account of the exercises of Commencement Week is written by our correspondent and agent, Mrs. Lottie Davis, wife of Mr. Geo. J. Davis, a teacher at Hampton:The The Hampton Normal and Arficultural Institute: Public Exercises of the Week befinning May 23, 1894.Wednesday afternoon the graduating class held their exercises on the piazza of the Mansion House, consisting of class song, addresses by its members, and also an address by Dr. Parkhurst.The audience, led by the class, marched to our Memorial Chapel, where they adopted a maple tree which grows near it.At 7.30 P. M. the whole school, officers, teachers and guests, were entertained in gymnasium by the speeches from Trustees and other guests. We were proud to note among the Hon. J. R.  Durham of Philadelphia, ex-minister to Hayti, Rev. V. Tunnell, Dean of King Hall, Washington, D. C., and Mr. Tanner, the son of Bishop Tanner. The speeches were all good and very instructive.Thursday, 24 ; Anniversary day. Inspection of boys in ranks, 8.30 A. M., and regular class exercises in Academic and Science buildings from 9 to 12 A. M. The marching of girls and boys from Academic to Virginia Hall, 12.15 P. M., is always a pleasing sight -- girls dressed in their light prints and boys in their dark blue uniforms. All of the Industrial Exhibits, showing products of farm and shop were in the Stone Memorial Building. Luncheon was over at 1 o'clock.1.30 P. M., students, teachers, officers and guests were seated in gymnasium and heard some original essays and addresses by members of the graduating class, and also from graduates of other years.Mr. Booker T. Washington, president of Tuskegee Normal School, made a rousing speech.Mr. Logan, treasurer of the same institution also delivered an able address. An excellent speech was delivered M. Mead of Boston, editor of the New England Magazine. The plantation songs were sung with the usual enthusiasm by the students. The president of the board of trustees, Mr. Ogden made appropriate address to the graduating class and awarded the diplomas. Perfect order prevailed during all the exercises.The young ladies who graduated in the class were Estelle Pennington, from Baltimore, Md., Bessie Flowers, from Penn., Florence Price, Evelyn Winn, Matilda Taylor, Eliza Baytop, Lizzie Rainey, Edmonia Anderson, Richetta Chappell, Mary Fleming, Kate Mosely, Maggie Crowley, Sallie Anderson and Martha Yung from Virginia, Selina Printop from New York State.Friday, 25. A conference of graduates and others was held both morning and afternoon to discuss methods by which graduates of Hampton can best promote the welfare of their race. This is a new feature added to the Anniversary Week, and it is hoped that some good will be gleaned from it. The discussion of the forenoon was that of land-buying and farming, and what the percent was of negro landowners, compared with his white brother. It was discussed very intelligently.Saturday evening, May 26. A very pretty May-party was given by the Whittier School children in the gymnasium under the management of Miss Laura Miller, Miss, Mary A. Tucker, Miss Marie Louise Burgese, and Mrs. Geo. J. Davis.The children acted their parts well and quite a little sum was realized.WOMAN'S ERA.Ida B. WellsMotto: Help to make the World Better.The closing meetings of the Boston Woman's Ear Club have been full of interest: among other things the club undertook to investigate the case of the colored girl said to have been held in slavery in Boston for four years. The report of the case will be found in another column.At the meeting held on the 30th of may a large number of leading men were invited to a conference with the club. Among those who responded were lawyers Walker, Wilson, Morgan and Plummer. Mr. Emory Morris, Chas. Alexander, Dr. Callaway and Representative Teamoh. It was hoped to bring out the clergy, but not one responded. The conference considered the matter of lynching and what practical steps might be taken in the work against it. Many good suggestions were made and at last a committee composed of Messrs. Morris, Morgan and Wil-

son, Miss Gardner, Mrs. Agnes Adams and the Secretaries of the club was formed to consider the matter.Below is an extract from a letter received from Miss Wells, and which was written on receipt of the open letter to Mrs. Chant:LONDON, May 30, 1894.Dear Mrs. Ridley,--Your open letter just reached me. Thank you a thousand times for so strengthening my hands for it is the first word of support which has come to me from across the Atlantic from my own race and it helps the cause so much. It is especially needed because Mrs. Chant has chosen to ignore me and the movement ever since she has been proven wrong. I called twice at her house here in London to convince her of the great need of her help, but she was out, and her daughter couldn't tell when at any time she would be in. Then I left my card and address asking that she would send me word when I could see her. That was more than three weeks ago. She has utterly ignored the whole matter. I shall have this published in the Inquirer, the Unitarian paper, and it will reach many. Also others as it may occur to me.I wish I had time to write a long letter, but I must stop now if I wish this to go out in the mail which goes to America tomorrow.I have received both copies of the WOMAN'S ERA and would have written something for you before now, but I have simply not had time. I never was so hard worked in my life.I am so glad of the opportunity to tell the story that I have spoken, wrote and been interviewed incessantly until I have overtasked my strength. For the past three days, I have had to succumb and take absolute rest by the orders of a great London doctor. I am the guest of the wife of the great London Daily News, and have no words to express their care of me. I speak tonight and shall be in London ten days longer. I have already been here five weeks, then I spend the month of June at other places, hoping to sail July 1. If I can spare a moment between now and then I shall be glad to send to the WOMAN'S ERA. Meanwhile if you wish to write, please address me at the following place.Yours lovinglyIDA B. WELLS,53 Bedford St., N. Liverpool.CLUB GOSSIP.Mrs. Hannah SmithMrs. Matthews of the Woman's Loyal Union of New York and Brooklyn has sent a circular to the leading newspapers and men of the south inquiring into the condition and prospects of the people; the circular is comprehensive and pointed. Its design is to gather from the most reliable sources facts as to the mental, moral and financial position of our people, their relation to their white neighbors, and conclusion as to their probable future, and the possibility of forming Loyal Union among the women. The circular is an intelligent step in the right direction' the Loyal Union evidently intends gaining a clear understanding of the situation, and without doubt that is the way to undertake any broad work.At, the meeting of the Massachusetts State Federation of Clubs held at Marlboro, Mass., June 7, the Woman's Era Club was admitted to membership.The warm weather makes active club work out of the question; most large clubs will take a vacation. The prospects for a profitable winters work for our clubs are great. Everywhere our women are feeling fresh inspiration for organized work, not only is this true of the clubs already formed, but many new organizations are being formed.Many letters of inquiry have been received inquiring into the methods of forming leagues. The published reports upon the leagues are the best answers that can be given.A committee composed of the Secretaries of the Woman's Era Club together with Miss Eliza Gardner, Mrs. Agnes Adams and Messrs. Wilson, Morgan and Morris met at Miss Eliza Gardner's, 20 N. Anderson Street, on Monday evening, June 18, to devise ways and means with which to arouse public sentiment in regards to the lynching of the colored people. The men and women of Boston have long deplored the condition of things in the south and elsewhere, and feel that something ought to be done at the very earliest opportunity. After much discussion the committee organized with Mr. Butler R. Wilson as Chairman and Mrs. Hannah Smith as Secretary. The Chairman then laid out a very effective plan of the work to be done which was accepted by the committee, which committee was augmented by the addition of the names, Mrs. Ariana Sparrow, Mrs. Mary Howard. The Chairman then appointed the sub-committees which resulted in the following:--Committee on ResolutionsMr. Clement Morgan, Mr. Emory Morris, Miss Eliza Gardner.Committee to communicate with the Clergy--Mrs. U.A. Ridley, Miss E. Gardner, Mrs. Agnes Adams.Committee on Petition-- Mr. B.R. Wilson, Chairman, Mr. C. Morgan, Mr. Emory Morris, Mrs. Agnes Adams, Mrs. Mary Howard, Miss Lizzie Stewart, Miss Eva

Lewis, Miss Eliza Gardner, Mrs. U.A. Ridley, Mrs. Hannah Smith, Mrs. Ariana Sparrow.Committee on Pastors and Placards-Mrs. Agnes Adams, Mrs. Mary Howard, 32 Monroe Street, Highlands; Mr. Emory Morris, Market Street, Cambridge, Mass.; Miss Lizzie Stewart, 37 Buckingham Street.Press Committee--Mrs. U.A. Ridley, Miss Eva Lewis, Mrs. Ariana Sparrow, Mr. Clement Morgan.Committee on Newspaper Comments and Accounts and on Statistics--Miss Eva Lewis, Mrs. Mary Howard, Mr. C. Morgan, Mr. Emory Morris, Miss Eliza Gardner, Mr. A.C. Sparrow.Committee at Large--Mrs. J. St. P. Ruffin, President Woman's Era Club.The Committee adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman.MRS. HANNA SMITH,Secretary.CLOSING DAYS.N.E WOMAN SUFFRAGE ASS'N.As usual in New England the closing days of May and the whole month of June have been filled with profit and pleasure for workers in all fields of human progress. Closing meetings with social attachments have followed each other in quick succession, and kept the average society woman on the hop skip and jump to keep up with the procession of hall banquets, literary high teas, charity receptions and garden parties with feasting, music and dancing, and of course yearly reports and literary papers thrown in to hold down the balance and keep the New England women from becoming too frivolous, and so casting reproach upon her severe and sober ancestry. This year the woman suffragists led with their annual reunion and banquet in Music Hall; six hundred men and women sat at the supper tables and afterwards listened to some of the best and brightest speeches and music ever given at this always bright festival; and through it all the spirit of the pioneer, Lucy Stone, pervaded and incited the large gathering to greater enthushism than ever for the cause she loved.Moral Education Association.Then followed the feast of reason only of the M. E. A. This annual is always held in the morning and lives in the memory as fragrant of spring blooms--brought by the members--and cultured and helpful words said by the speakers. The opening address this year by the president, Mrs. Abba Goold Woolson, was a literary high feast, and proved that the most delicate subjects may be so skilfully handled as to be both pleasureable and profitable to listen to. The objects of this society are to endeavor to educate the moral sense of the community; to disseminate a knowledge of the laws that should govern human life in all its relations; and, when occasion demands, to ask of legislative and executive bodies the enactment of such statutes as are needful and the enforcement of such as exist, for the prevention of social vice, and the promotion of social purity.N.E. Woman's Club.The closing meetings of this, the mother of all woman's clubs with its reports of committees, felicitous speakers, and closing luncheon at the Vendome Hotel, would make an interesting volume of reading, as will be believed when it is remembered that Julia Ward Howe is president of the club, and nearly all the brightest and best in New England are members.Then after the Charity Club with its two hundred and fifty members, the Woman's Industrial Union, the Young Woman's Christian Association and that convention of the clubs with the largest possibilities of them all, known as the Working Girls Clubs had met, reported on the past and promised for the future, the busy season was fitly sounded out by the meeting of the State Federation of Clubs at Marlboro, Mass., on June 20th, and the garden party of the New England Woman's Press Association on Wednesday, June 20th, of which the "Post" woman thus filicitouslyfelicitously writes:"The New England Women's Press Association had its annual outing yesterday.Miss Alice Stone Blackwell was hostess, and her beautiful home at Pope's Hill, with its breezy views, broad paizzaspiazzas, green lawns and shady gardens, was thrown open to the members, of the association.It is only once a year that the newspaper women eschew the monthly literary meeting at Parker's and the intellectual pabulum thereof, to hold a "field day" somewhere out of the dusty city and the daily grind, where the programme consists chiefly of "loafing and inviting one's soul."This year Miss Blackwell extended the invitation to the association, and upward of fifty guests spent a delightful afternoon in  the fine old colonial mansion, whose every room holds tender memories of the beloved woman and dear housemother, Lucy Stone.Guests of honor were M. Ohannes Chatschumian of the University of Leipsic, Rev. Dr. and Mrs. Gregg, and unlike the poor boy who peeped at the festivities of the rich and decided that there were good times in this world and he was not in it, we peeped at it all and were a part of most of it.SHALL WE HAVE A CONVENTION OF THE COLORED WOMEN'S CLUBS?Birmingham, Ala.A convention of colored women's clubs and leagues would be in my judgment one of the greatest movements of the race. The great idea is that of unity--the lack of which is so marked among us. We know so little of one another, a convention would be a broad avenue by which we could learn more. We would be enabled to exchange thoughts, sympathy, gain helps and hints, learn where our work is most needed, in short, such a meeting would benefit us a thousand-fold.Where there is union, success is insured. It is the basis of society and has ever been. Organization is not advocated enough; it should be our watchword. Women's clubs, whose purpose is to better the condition of the race morally, intellectually and socially, should be established in every state in the Union. You have but to introduce the work and the inspiration is caught at once. Here in our city there are many noble workers ready to enter the field at once, when a fortnight ago they were ignorant of the fact that such a field lay before them. I admire the purpose of these clubs, protection for our women is so much needed, especially for the yournger ones everywhere, but particularly in the south. There are hundreds of germs that might develop into virtuous and noble womanhood that are crushed and buried in ignorance and degradation for the want of a little encouragement, a kind word, one ray of hope. Here in the southland hopes have so long proved vain that the natural result is despair. Here in the southland, in the midst of dire oppression, is a large field for labor, and I appeal to the several clubs already formed to lose no time in spreading this work throughout the south. In case you know no one you might introduce it among the female students of some college. You have but to manifest a heartfelt interest to succeed and there is no better way than to call a woman's national convention.This convention movement is the greatest in the history of the race. In the history of all nations women have played a prominent part, and the time has arrived for the daughters of Ethiopia to fall into line.One of the main objects of the convention should be to create sentiment against mob violence, and to recommend bills before the legislatures of the several states where it is indulged in. Such bills as Hon. H.C. Smith introduced before the Ohio legislature. Especial attention should be given to minor evils that tend in any way to retard the progress of the race. I suggest that the convention be held at Boston. It is the most appropriate place in my judgment, and aside from its excellent accommodations there are many places of historic note that would afford entertainment no other city could furnish, and although Boston is by no means the central city there is but little difference in the rates, as a passenger getting a season ticket south can go to Boston at nearly the same rates as to Chicago. I hope that such a movement will not be thwarted, but that the month of August, 1894, will ever stand out in history as one of the grandest and noblest in the last quarter of a century, and the promoters of the convention movement should never be forgotten.Yours for the convention,JOSEPHINE E. GHANT.FREE!Splendid Premium Offers.By special arrangement with the Boston Training School of Music, the Woman's Era is enabled to offer the following splendid premiums which offer we venture to say is unprecedented.FIRST PREMIUM.READ. To the one who obtains the largest number of subscribers, over one hundred, within the next six mouths we will give one year's tuition either in voice, violin, piano or harmony and counterpoint at the above-named school.SECOND PREMIUM.For the second highest number of subscribers in the next six months we will offer a term at the Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute for the summer of '94 with Instructions either in music, art, literature, elocution, oratory or shorthand and type-writing.THIRD PREMIUM.For the three children over nine years of age, first obtaining fifty subscribers for us, a years instruction on piano. This is for beginners.FOURTH PREMIUM.To all contestants failing to gain the premiums we will give a commission of twenty-five per cent.The Boston Training School of Music makes a specialty of the training of teachers of music, it is a school of the highest grade and for these reasons and because this school has made no distinction on account of race, the management of this paper has selected it for its premium offer. The number of young people who come to Boston for a musical education increases yearly; through these premiums it is hoped to give a helping hand to worthy aspirants.A course in piano, voice, violin, theory or harmony and counter point at the finest school of its kind in the country.For further particulars address the Woman's Era, St. Augustine's Trade Schools, North Grove Street, Boston, Mass.GEORGE L. RUFFIN,
LESSONS IN SINGING.
Lamperti Method.
AFTER OCTOBER 1st,
103 Charles Street.ADVERTISE IN THE WOMAN'S ERA THE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTEREST OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.The WOMAN'S ERA, as the organ of the colored women's clubs, has a large circulation in many of the large cities, notably Boston, New Bedford, Providence, New York, Chicago, Washington and Kansas City.The Literary, Musical, and Domestic Departments are under the control of competent writers and critics.With its large circulation among women, and particularly among women of the refined and educated classes, it offers peculiar advantages to advertisers of household articles, wearing apparel, books, magazines, musical instruments, and so forth.Its rates are exceedingly liberal.Try it, and you will not regret it.EDITORIAL.All the World Loves a Lover.These June days seem to be given over to marrying and giving in marriage; roses and weddings are alike running riot, and club women as well as other women are in their element. Decorations and gowns are given first thought and the "world's  problems" for the present are religatedrelegated to the rear. THE WOMAN'S ERA can but join the procession. Cupid is king for the nonce and we all do him homage.The Charge Disproved.In ten years (1882-1891) eight hundred negroes were lynched in the southern states. If the claim of the southern people and their northern apologizers is true that the lynchings at the south are because negroes are given to assaults upon women, then the eight hundred instances of lynching must have been because of this crime. What is the fact?269 were charged with rape.253  "     "      "   murder.44   "     "      "   robbery.37 were charged with incendiarism.4    "     "      "   burglary.27   "     "      "   race prejudice.13 were charged with quarreling with white men.10 were charged with making threats.7 were charged with rioting.5    "     "      "   miscegenation.21   "     "      "   no reason givenBy this table published in the Chicago Tribune, January, 1892, it will be seen that only three more than one third of the persons lynched were even charged with this crime, behind which southern murderers and their northern apologists shield themselves.Governor Stone of Mississippi attempts to excuse the south by attacking the character of the one woman, Ida B. Wells, driven from the south by the lynchers who is arousing the indignation of the old world against wholesale murder in the United States. Gov. Stone is a coward. He attacks a woman in her absence. He is a party to the murder of negroes in his state because he makes no attempt to punish the murderers. These figures support the claim of Miss Wells that no excuse exists for murder by lynching, and they condemn the south where this murder is done and demonstrate the falsity of the charge against the negroes of the south, and convict their slanderers of a crime against a race almost as wicked and horrible as their slanderous charge.A Safe Voyage and Quick Return.The hearty good wishes of the people of West End of Boston will attend the Rev. C. N. Field, rector of St. John's Church and St. Augustine Church, in his voyage across the Atlantic. He will be greatly missed and his return will be anxiously watched for. Several years ago he came to Boston but slightly known, at a time when a crisis hung over the field to which he came and when he was indifferently received. Today he is welcomed in every work of charity. No movement in the interest of the poor goes without his earnest and active support. The rum shop recognizes in him a never tiring, intelligent and forceful opponent. His plan is to make people better by making them more intelligent and by giving them healthy  occupation, innocent amusement, and by opening to them all means of education. and the people have been quick to recognize his services in securing from landlords leaner, warmer and healthier tenements for the poor. They have appreciated his efforts to secure in congested districts of the city branches of the public library. At the West and North Ends of the city he is know as the friend of the children, the poor and the sick, and they will miss him most.His public spirit, fearless advocacy of the right and his ability to unite all classes of men in his work made him a great and successful power. It would be difficult to fill his place, and it would be a long, long time before the people for whom he has labored day and night, would become reconciled to his absence.Miss Willard in Boston.Miss Frances Willard has made a short visit to Boston. A reception by representative people was tendered her at the Vendome. Miss Willard has placed herself on the list of apologists for lynching; 

a marked copy of this paper containing the article on Apologists for Lynching was sent to Miss Willard, and we would suggest to any one who has the report of Mr. Douglass lecture on Lessons of the Hour with the pertinent remarks on Miss Willard's course that they kindly furnish her with a copy. It is well to give due recognition to Miss Willard's splendid work for temperance; it is also well that she should understand that there are several million women in this country who are bitterly disappointed in her.Notes.The true story of the so-called "Slavery in Boston" case is crowded out of this issue of ERA. The full account of that case which so stirred up Boston a short time ago will be given in our next. Also some reports of the needs and condition of the, Sea Island sufferers, and a full account of the work of Miss Wells in England and Scotland by herself.SOCIAL NEWS.WILSON -- EVANS.June weddings have been unusually numerous; none among them have attracted more interest and attention than that of Miss Mary Evans, of Washington, D. C., and Butler R. Wilson Esq., of Boston, which took place Wednesday, June 27, at the residence of Mr. and Mrs. Murray, the home of the bride's mother.The beautiful home on S St., Washington, is almost an ideal place for a home wedding. Its artistic interior, with the rich frescoing and tiling and stained lass effects, needed little decoration to bring out their beauty. Miss Evans who, with her tall, slender figure, dark complexion and rich, black hair is always spoken of as a "particularly striking-looking girl," looked a picture in her white bengaline gown; she was attended by two bridesmaids, Miss Marion Shadd and Miss Elizabeth Cook, both of Washington, and the ceremony was performed by Rev. Francis J. Grinke. The large number of guests present included almost all the representative people of Washington--the Bruces, Shadds, Purvises, Frasers, Cooks, etc., etc., etc. Mr. and Mrs. Wilson left immediately for New York and Newport; at the latter place they will be the guests of the Smith's at their delightful home on Mary St.Mrs. Wilson, as Miss Evans, was one of the leading girls of Washington. After graduating from Oberlin College she was appointed superintendent of physical culture in the Washington public schools. Miss Evans entered upon her profession with enthusiasm, spending her vacations in well-known schools in New England; she is an accomplished musician, and Boston society congratulates itself upon this acquisition to its ranks.Mr. Wilson is not a native Bostonian, he was born in Georgia, and after graduating from Atlanta University came to Boston, when a boy of about twenty, to study law. He entered Boston University, graduated in the well-remembered year when "Bob" Terrell took his degree it Harvard, and Miss Consuelo Clark left the Boston University Medical School with first honors. Mr. Wilson entered the law-office of Judge Ruffin, and after the latter's death was associated with his son H. S. Ruffin; he at once entered, and has done faithful, intelligent service for the Republican party as a ready, interesting speaker. Mr. Wilson has recently been appointed by Gov. Greenhalge Commissioner of Emigration and Pauperism.Both Mr. and Mrs. Wilson have been closely identified with the WOMAN'S ERA--Mrs. Wilson, as Miss Evans, as the author of the "Health and Beauty" papers and Mr. Wilson as an editorial contributor.TEAMOH-JACKSON.The greatest social event of of years in Fall River was the marriage of Miss Julia Jackson of that city to R. T. Teamoh of Boston, member of the House of Representatives. The bride who is well known in this vicinity for graceful and refined manners, as well as her prepossessing face was attended by her sister Miss Annie Jackson as bridesmaid; Mr. W. P. Hare went down from Boston to officiate as best man, also did Messrs E. S. Glover and N. Appo Johnson who acted as ushers.The ceremony was performed by Rev. M. Hascall of the First Baptist Church of Fall River, who read the services from a white and gold book which also contained the marriage certificate and which was afterwards presented to the bride. A large reception followed the services during which Mr. and Mrs. Teamoh left on their wedding trip which will be spent among friends in Rhode Island, Connecticut and Long Island, N.Y.Mr. and -Mrs. Teamoh will be -it home at 65 West Cedar Street, Boston, Sunday, July 15.FREEMAN -- CHURCH.Miss Isadora Christiana Church of Chelsea was married to Mr. Edwin Butler Freeman of Hartford, on Monday, June l8th noon, in St. Luke's Episcopal Church Chelsea. The natural beauty of the bride was enhanced by the simple bridal robe of white with tulle and orange blossoms. Congratulations were

offered, and a fine collation served at the home of the bride after the services, to which the entire church party returned. Late in the afternoon the couple left for their new home in Hartford, Conn.Mrs. J. R. Lynch, of Washington, accompanied by her daughter Alice, has sailed for Europe. It is Mrs. Lynch's intention to make a permanent home abroad. The proscriptions, hindrances and lack of opportunity which surround the colored people of this country have always been particularly trying to Mrs. Lynch, who is a woman of great Spirit, fine mind and wide culture. For the present she will place her daughter in a pension, and will herself begin a course of study in one of the German Universities.Mr. and Mrs. Chas. Cook (Miss Abele, of Philadelphia) have left for Scotland on their wedding tour.Mrs. Foster, of Cambridge, projected and carried out a very successful reception and tea for the benefit, of St. Monica's Home. It was held at Odd Fellow's Hall, Cambridgeport, the afternoon and evening of June 17. The hall is a perfect one for dancing, and because of its lofty ceiling and large windows was very comfortable, even on that intensely hot day. The arrangements were perfect; glasses of delicious Russian tea were served with crackers by girls of the "smart" set in summer dress. Miss Baldwin, of the receiving party, carried a beautiful basket of roses. The music was good, the crowd large, and it is hoped a goodly sum was realized for the charity.Among the graduates of the Boston University this year was one representative of the race, Mr. Edgar P. Benjamin from the law department. Mr. Benjamin, who received the degree of LL.B., attained such a high standard in his studies that he was awarded the honor of "Cum laude," being the first colored young man who ever received it from the Boston University. Mr. Benjamin is a Boston young man. He graduated from the Sherwin Grammar School at the head of a class of fifty, next entered the English High School, where he won several prizes; after graduating from there and taking an advanced course he entered the University, where he has won scholarships each year.With such a record we believe that his success in his future legal career is assured, and he has the well wishes of all his friends.R.H. Terrell, Esq. of Washington came to town on the 21st of June for a week's stay and participation in the Harvard Commencement festivities. This is the tenth anniversary of Mr. Terrell's graduation, and he enjoyed it to the full.The Grant-Bailey wedding was a morning one and the costumes corresponded to the time of day. Miss Grant wore it very pretty and appropriate gown of white swivel silk trimmed with lavender moire; with this she wore a large white hat.Mr. J.H. Lewis' eldest son Harry was one of this year's grammar school graduates.Miss Nannie Morse has returned home for the summer from boarding-school.One of the "swell " weddings of the month was that or Dr. J. Francis Smith, of Brooklyn, and Miss Annie Collins, of Germantown, Pa.Mr. Estev Mars officiated as best man and Misses Helen Stevens and Kate Smith as bridesmaids; the ushers were Messrs. Jas. T. Bradford, Jr., Frank Downing and Chas. Moore.The wedding took place at the elegant home of Mr. John S. Trower the uncle of the bride, which was profusely decorated with flowers.The bride's gown was of white watered silk, and the maids were dressed in pink china silk.A large number of society people of New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington were present. After the marriage Dr. and Mrs. Smith left on a wedding tour the destination of which is of course, a secret.It is rumored that a large charity ball will be given during the season at Newport.Miss Turner, of Washington, has returned to Boston again this season to study.R.G.L. Paige, Esq., of Norfolk, is paying an extended visit to New England.The engagement of that very popular young lady, Miss Lulu Messer, of Washington, to Mr. Frank Davis, of the same city has been announced. The wedding will take place in July.Miss Ella Smith, of Newport is entertaining a large and delightful house-party.Mrs. R.P. Ransom went on to the Warwick-Smith wedding and had quite an adventure. She was on the Plymouth when it ran ashore on Long Island coast; however, the train which came to the relief of the passengers carried her to her destination in time.Miss Dora Cole, of Philadelphia, is a bicyclist. Recently she had quite a severe fall from which she is now recovering, however.Mr. Samuel Jameson is summering in a most charming retreat at Duxbury.Dr. Stewart, (Miss Consuelo Clark) of Youngstown, Ohio, although married is still practicing her profession. Her husband is a successful lawyer.Mr. and Mrs. Nathan Toomer (Miss Nina Pinchback) have set up their menage in the house formerly occupied by the Pinchbacks.Mr. Wm. Potter, of, Philadelphia, has been seriously sick with blood-poisoning caused by a wound inflicted with a lobster claw.Never has such a feast of weddings been known. Boston, New York, Philadelphia seem to be trying to outdo one another, but Boston bears the distinction of having three prominent men married on the same day.And still there are rumors of more to come. From Philadelphia we hear that Miss Blanche Warwick will soon follow her brother's lead and will marry Dr. Benj. Sayres early in the fall.The engagement of Miss Theodora Lee, of Chicago, to Mr. Wm. Purnell, of Washington, is also announced.Mr. J.H. Lewis and family have left for the south. Miss Sarah Peake, Mrs. Lewis' sister, will be married in August and preparations are being made at Hampton for a big wedding in the old time lavish style.Mrs. Lewis will stop on her way at Philadelphia and Washington, where she will introduce her young sister, Miss Gertrude Peake, who is just out.Mr. Milton Brown graduated from the Harvard Medical school on the 27th. Dr. Brown will be stationed at the Emergency Hospital for the summer months.Miss Florence Johnson, who has been a student at the Conservatory this winter, will go home to Brooklyn for her summer vacation July 5.Mr. and Mrs. Wm. H. Dupree have purchased a house on Cottage St., Roxbury, into which they will shortly move.Miss Hattie Dabney left for her home in RichmohdRichmond, Virginia, on June 8.The youngest son and latest addition to the family of Mr. and Mrs. George Dickey, of Washington, has been named Wormley Stevens Dickey, Mrs. Andrew F. Stevens standing for him as godmother.Mr. Harry E. Spencer, of Wilmington, has just had M. C. added by the University of, Penn. to the B. S. already attached to his name.Miss Ella Smith, of Newport, was in Boston the early part of July on her annual New England trip. New scenes and triumphs do not seem to efface the memory of her college days, and Miss Smith returns every year to do living homage to her Alma Mater.Miss Eva Lewis spent the 18th in Portland, Me.The Monday Club, an organization of young men in Wilimington, boasts that there is not a paper published by our race that is not found on their tables. We do not think that the WOMAN'S ERA has found its way there yet, but, being men of unusual intelligence we are sure that they will appreciate a good thing when they see it and send us their subscription for it shortly.The colored normal school, of Richmond Va., closed June 15 with thirty graduates.Miss Lucy Moten has just finished her first year in the medical department of Howard University.Mr. and Mrs. U.A. Ridley have gone to Newport to visit Miss Smith and meet Mr. and Mrs. Wilson.Miss Lillian Lewis is still on the sick list; her illness is still serious and her friends anxious.GRANT -- BAILEY.The marriage of Dr. George F. Grant to Fannie Bailey on the Wednesday the 27th of June was an event of great social interest, because of the popularity of the bride and the wide reputation of the bridegroom. The wedding was very quiet, occurring at the home of the bride's mother on Walden St., No. Cambridge, the only guests being the immediate members of the family. The bride wore her travelling dress--a handsome English covert cloth suit. It was a morning wedding, Dr. and Mrs. Grant starting upon their wedding tour immediately after the ceremony. Their destination is at present a secret, but they will spend most of the summer travelling, and their handsome residence on Charles St. will not be open to friends until the fall.Mrs. Grant is the only sister of Mr. Henry Bailey, a Harvard graduate and principal of the Washington High School. As Miss Bailey she had a large acquaintance and because of her brightness and amiability was one of the "popular" girls.Dr. Grant is one of the best known dentists of the U. S. After his graduation from Harvard he was for many years an instructor of the Dental School; his specialty

is mechanical dentistry, and he has made himself famous by his invention of an artificial palate. He is a member and frequent lecturer of the principal societies, and at one time went to Dublin to read a paper before a convention of dentists. This is his second marriage; his first wife and the mother of his two daughters was Miss Georgiana Smith, daughter of John J. Smith. The first Mrs. Grant died a few years ago.REMINISCENCES.Nancy PrinceLUCRETIA L. LENOX--NANCY PRINCE.BY AN OLD BOSTONIAN,The death of Mrs. L. L. Lenox, wife of Mr. John M. Lenox, removes another branch of one of the oldest colored families in New England. Her grandfather, Prince Ames, was a soldier in the 27th regiment of Penn., Washington's army, and served from Bunker Hill to the surrender of Cornwallis at Yorktown, and on one occasion was personally commended by Washington himself, who was trying the faithfulness of the guard for true soldierly conduct. His widow, whom many now living will remember, drew a pension till her death, which took place at Jamaica Plain in 1864, at the advanced age of ninety-seven. Mrs. Lenox's father, John T. Hilton, was born in Pennsylvania, but came to Boston at the age of seventeen, and until his death, in 1864, was one of the most prominent colored men in the country. In the early days of the antislavery movement he was called Mr. Garrison's right hand man by the colored people, and was afterwards, 1854, vice-president of the antislavery society. Her mother, who died in Cambridge, November 2, 1882, was a member of the female antislavery society; both being members of the African Baptist Church, Belknap (now Joy) St., where she (Mrs. Lenox) was at one time a member of the choir. Mrs. Lenox obtained her education partly at the Exclusive School on Belknap St. and at the Alumni Grammar School in Cambridge, and was esteemed by the committee as one of the two best readers in the Cambridge schools at that time. After her graduation she obtained a situation in a daguerrotype case-making establishment in Boston, where she was employed for several years. She was always one of the most active in every measure in which she was connected for the improvement of her people condition. Whe was among the young ladies that was always ready to co-operate with the Young Men's Literary society on occasions when their assistance was solicited, as it often was. (For this society not only did much to foster mental culture and improvement among the colored people of Boston and vicinity, but was also practical in many ways). She was also often seen going around carrying a number of bills given her by her father to be placed in special places, having the heading, so familiar to our people in those days, " To the Rescue! ------- Fugitives, about to be arrested," sent forth by order of the vigilant committee when some brave fellows, who had succeeded in making their escape from slavery, seemed in danger of apprehension and arrest. Many, now living, will remember her presiding at the tables of the antislavery fairs, and how much her cheerful ways contributed to enliven those occasions. She also was a member of the "Fourier Club", a society consisting of both white and colored persons, find was very influential in alleviating the conditions of the colored people.Mrs. Lenox, after her marriage, was for many years a resident of Waltham, Mass, where she was always characterized by her devotion to her down-trodden people, and never ceased to speak or act in their behalf, when opportunity presented itself. It was through her personal influence and recommendation that that author and philanthropist, Nancy Prince, was introduced and became popular with the people of that town and the places adjacent; and the lectures she delivered from time to time in the former place may still be remembered by some of the older residents. Many an one in the old days gave testimony to the light they received from that entertaining speaker by her rehersalrehearsal of her experience and labors in Russia and West India, for Mrs. Lenox was among the first of the many colored workers to embark for the W. I. after emancipation, where her labors with others that went from the U. S. were of great service, and her co-operation in antislavery work and in special works of philanthropy. It may not be known to many that Mrs. Prince was the founder of the first orphan asylum for colored children in New England and was its firs matron. Her book, "Life of Nancy Prince," published in 1849, may still be found in the houses of many of the old residents of Boston, as well as other places all over Massachusetts.Mrs. Lenox was highly esteemed in Waltham, where she and her husband did much to dispel prejudice in that place, and to increase the antislavery sentiment there existing. She was also noted for her charitable disposition and her many acts in this direction will be remembered by not a few. Mrs. Lenox never forgot the lessons of Christianity, which were early inculcated in her by noble, high- minded parents.HEALTH AND BEAUTY FROM EXERCISE.Mary P. EvansMARY P. EVANS.Paper No.3,The German system of gymnastics, almost a century old and built up by men of great culture and experience,--physicians, physiologists, and pedagogues--embraces exercises with apparatus, calisthenics, outdoor sports, such a jumping, running, leaping, throwing the weight, wards, dumb bells and clubs and military gymnastics. In this system specialism is discouraged. the aim is general physical culture. Another feature is class work, which produces endless pleasure and refreshment of mind, and to secure this result the instruction begins with the simple and works up to the more complicated movements.The Swedish or Ling system of gymnastics is founded upon the laws of nature and the human organism, and the exercises are selected only when proved to be needed by the body. It aims to correct faulty growth and bad posture. This system starts with the functions of the heart and lungs, as the fundamental functions, with the welfare of all the other functions dependent upon them. Starting with the heart and lungs right, the progress is steady and systematic.Perhaps the best system to be pursued is a combination of the Ling and German systems under careful supervision of experienced instructors. In these two systems and the outdoor games and exercises in the reach of most of us may be found the means of bringing the body into harmony with the will, of attaining the grace of body, the growth of muscle,--the proportion so often lost sight of--the health of body and brain, and the dexterity of limbs and control of nerves of such inestimable value.Faithful, earnest and painstaking physical exercise, such as has been indicated under intelligent direction, rewards the girl who keeps it up with health, youth and beauty. It keeps the body in the best condition for throwing off disease. It enables you to keep in the best condition for work with the hands or with the brain. It is a wholesome and powerful preventive of morbid, sickly and injurious brooding and thinking. It helps you to see things, to know people, and to judge them in a broad instead of a narrow spirit. It prepares you to meet disappointment, sorrow, ill treatment and great suffering as the strong, courageous and splendid woman meets them. It is a great aid to clear, quick and right thinking.Physical beauty, strength, health and youth are priceless treasures, but they cannot take the place of mind and heart. The physically perfect woman is not full grown unless heart and mind have been also developed, trained and refined. Indeed, one aids the other, and neither can be fully developed without the other. "An open heart, and an honssthonest mind are as essential to youth and health as breathing is." The face, the eyes, the mouth reflect the sentiments, the thought of heart and mind. The mind and heart that feed on diseased ideas, that live in impurity instead of in the fresh, inspiring, healthy atmosphere of right living and right acting, will take from the face all refinement, all beauty, and mark it with hard lines.LITERARY DEPARTMENT.England is enjoying a monopoly on the novelists of the hour and is taking great pride in furnishing America with its fiction, as most of the books that have attracted universal attention in this country lately have been written by English authors.No one is more fit to head the list of the popular English writers of the present day than is Thomas N. Hardy, who has been enjoying a reputation for years and has received the enthusiastic support of the best of the literary people of England. Of his books "Tess" in which lie depicts the recuperative power of a fallen woman, has been most widely discussed. He says that he takes his characters from the lower classes because he finds in them more sentiment and romance.Walter Besant also depicts the lower classes.-- His characters in "All Sorts and Conditions of Men" are from studies carefully made by him while wandering through the slums of London. This book was written for a purpose and, strange to say, accomplished it. In it he showed that in all London there was not a place where a respectable poor man could go for recreation; and from the discussion which it caused, Queen Victoria opened the People's Palace, a great, hall where the poorest may find the best and purest amusement.An adventurer who was able to turn his adventures into literature, and his literature into fame and money is H. Rider Haggard. And all before he had reached his thirty-fifth year! His first book was a failure, his second brought him fifty dollars; but from "She" he realized fifty thousand. He is now living quietly in a beautiful home with his wife and children and is the lion of all London.Rudyard Kipling, who is now making his home in Vermont, is said to have brought India nearer to England than did the Suez Canal.

He has written nothing of New England worthy of his genius, but he says that he has a hundred stories of India unwritten.Another adventurer who can send his imagination back into history and forward into the unknown, and who call chill the blood of and send horror to the heart of his readers is Robert Louis Stevenson. "Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde"and "David Balfour" are good examples of his style, but possibly his best is yet to come. He is now in Samoa.Clarke Russell writes spirited tales of adventure of which he was himself a part. His tales are of the sea, treating of storm rather than sunshine. "The Wreck of the Grosvenor" is the most popular in this country.Grant Allen, born in Canada, educated at Oxford, widely known as it writer on botany and physiology, and as exponent of the Darwinian Theory, made his first debut as a novelist, in "Strange Stories." Since then he has continued to write novels which deal with odd phases of life.Conan Doyle is a London physician who is so entertaining as a writer that he is no longer allowed to heal the sick. His first success "Micah Clark," and his latest "The Refugees;" but the most popular of all his books are those on "The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes." These are wonderfully clever detective stories, and the original of "Sherlock Holmes" is a doctor in Edinburgh, a former instructor of Dr. Doyle. So clamorous had the public become for more of the adventures, that the author was obligeobliged to kill his hero, and profittingprofiting by the example of Bret Harte and Rider Haggard, refuses to resuscitate him.Jas. Matthew Barrie is a Scotchman, a graduate of Edinburgh University, but who now makes his home in London. He is something of a humorist, and has lately been writing plays. "A Little Minister" and "A Window in Thrums" are his most popular books.The most widely read and widely discussed novel upon religion is "Robert Elsmere" by Mrs. Humphrey Ward, on whom it is conceded that George Eliot's mantle has fallen. Her next book was "The History of David Grieve," which was read and discussed still more widely. Her latest novel is "Marcella", which is published in two volumes in this country, and in England three. It is selling well, but is not being talked about to any great extent.Madame Sarah Grand, the author of "The Heavenly Twins" was born in Ireland of English parentage. She was married at sixteen and became the step-mother of two boys. She is said to be a very womanly woman, although she holds her opinions with a man-like firmness. She believes in absolute equality between husband and wife, and believes in the emancipation of woman from shallowness and ignorance, but not from domesticity. "The Heavenly Twins" is better liked in America than in England, though it is widely read in both countries.William E. Norris, the author of "Matrimony," "No New Thing" and other well-known novels writes a sort of story that introduces his readers to good company. He lives in a beautiful country home supplied with everything that makes life delightful, and spends three hours of each day writing.William Black is an author who excels in the description of natural scenery, but whose stories have nearly all a tragic ending, and leave an impression of sadness on the mind. "The Princess of Thule" and "Macleod of Dare" are romances of the Hebrides Islands.Miss Beatrice Harraden, the author of, "Ships that Pass in the Night," is seeking rest in a little village not far from Yonkers, N. Y. She is a very slight little woman about thirty years of age and is afflicted with paralysis. Part of her writing is done with her left hand. She had no title for her book when she carried it to the publisher, and it was he who suggested that the book be called by its present name which was the heading of one of her chapters. She is now at work upon another novel which she does not expect to complete for eight or nine months.WOMEN AT HOME.Marie Louise BurgessMARIE LOUISE BURGESSNOTES ON NURSINGPaper No. II.The care of the sick room forms a very important part of the nursing, the old saying "Cleanliness is next to Godliness" is nowhere more applicable than here. The nurse herself should be neat to a fault; she should have her hair neatly combed, clean calico or plain blue gingham dresses with deep wide cuffs and large aprons. Caps are not worn by all, but a nurse who has served her time and received her diploma fully realizes that to wear her uniform is an honor and is the proper garb for a nurse on duty, and belongs only to the trained nurse.The teeth should be kept in good order, the nails well trimmed and sensible soft shoes worn to prevent noise when moving around the sick room.The first thing to be noticed

about a sick room is the air. Some people are afraid of air, but if more people ventilated the rooms properly there would be less tuberculosis in the world and especially among our own race. The more fresh air the better. The temperature of a sick room ought to be 70 degrees Fahrenheit, and it is well, if possible, to put the patient into the most pleasant room in the house where plenty of sunlight may come in. Watch the temperature, do not let it get chilly, never allow a patient, (no matter how warm it may be) to lie without a blanket over him. Oftentimes it is very hard to make them understand that this is necessary, but a chill would be liable to terminate fatally when one has a fever.In order to ventilate carefully it is well to open the windows from top and bottom, the air which comes into the room from the lower part of the window is better, it circulates better through the rooms; and often it is found necessary to put a screen in front of the window. Avoid draughts.Next to be considered is the condition of the patient's bed, notice carefully that all sheets are smooth and carefully tucked into the bottom of the bed, the pillows smooth, and comfortably placed under the head. Notice the wearing apparel, see that every article is smooth, nothing is more disagreeable than wrinkles to lie on. In my experience I find that different people are to be treated differently; some patients like one thing, others another, and it is wise to try to please the patient if possible, provided it will not conflict with the doctors orders. Always carry out the physicians orders to the letter, never try to question an order, give the medicine exactly when ordered, let the patient be your first thought. Nothing is more essential to the recovery of a patient, than cleanliness and careful bathing. The patient perspires very freely and has to be bathed very often. Bathe every day if possible, and if convenient change the top sheet every morning. The best time to give a bath is at 10 A. M., between breakfast and dinner. Frequent bathing keeps the pores of the skin open and  a great deal of waste matter is carried off by the skin.For the benefit, of those who do not know how to give a sponge bath I will tell you in this paper.Have plenty of towels and soap, two pitchers of water, one hot and the other cold, a large wash bowl and foot tub. Have the water about 98 degrees Fahrenheit, two wash cloths and a slop jar. Two extra blankets, brush and comb, tooth brush, etc. Place everything by the side of the bed and think before beginning to undress your patient so as to have nothing to leave the room for during the bath. Place the patient between two blankets, then remove the clothing and bathe carefully only one portion of the body at a time. Change water often and bathe only one side at a time then gently turn the patient and bathe the other side. Wash the feet the last thing. Put on the night dress very carefully by putting one arm in first, then the head and other arm. Next, comes the patient's hair, one side at a time, and lastly change the bed linen. Take the clean sheet lengthwise, fold it in very small folds or roll it towards the middle, placed the rolled part against the patient's back, smooth out the part not folded then gently turn your patient towards the smooth part of the bed and draw the rolled sheet over to the back part, tuck in both sides. Thus you put on the under sheet, a draw sheet is folded in the middle by the two hems and put on in the same manner under the back and hips. The top sheet is put on in an entire different manner. Lift the clothes up at the foot, take the clean top sheet which has previously been rolled halfway from the top hem and place the smooth part over the patient's feet, tuck in at the bottom with the rest of the bed clothing and draw the rolled part up, smooth carefully and your patient is sweet and clean. It takes from one hour to an hour and a half to do this carefully, but the comfort of the patient is assured when the bath is over. Alcohol may be rubbed on the patient, but it is not absolutely necessary. Some light nourishment may be given immediately after the bath, a glass of milk or cup of beef tea to prevent exhaustion.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 4. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.BUTLER R. WILSON,
ATTORNEY and COUNSELLOR AT LAW,
NOTARY PUBLIC,
34 School Street, (Room 33)
BOSTOND.A. NEWCOMB & SON,
DEALER IN
Fresh, Salt and Smoked Fish.
Fresh opened oysters and Clams.
194 Cambridge St., Boston, Mass.
Orders called for and delivered promptly.THE AMERICAN WRINGER CO.
13 & 15 BROADWAY EXTENSION. 
Boston, Mass.
Manufacturers of Clothes Wringers.
All kinds of Wringers and Sweepers repaired.
Orders by mail promptly attended to.LESSONS BY MAIL.
Instructions in English Composition,
Grammar, Use of Capitals, Punctuation,
Formation of Sentences, etc. Address,
Miss M.W. GOULD,
Box 165. Readville, Mass.PRIVATE BOARD.
MRS. ELIZABETH E. COOLEY will
accommodate a few select boarders for the
summer. Transient or permanent,
AT 62 PHILLIPS ST., BOSTON.For Every Kind of PRINTING 
Go to
Chas. Alexander,
Publisher of THE MONTHLY REVIEW,
30 Columbus Avenue, BOSTON.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 4. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ALTANTAATLANTA, GA.
REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D. D. President.
THIS Institution trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedom of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions from those who are willing to help towards their education. Write to the President.BOSTON TRAINING SCHOOL OF MUSICINCORPORATED
Vocal and Instrumental Music,
Harmony, Theory and Composition.
Pupils thoroughly Prepared for Teaching and Public Performance.
Central Location. CATALOGUE FREE.
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M., Director,
Music Hall Building, Boston, Mass.WHY YOU SHOULD SUBSCRIBE TO THE WOMAN'S ERA.Because it represents the best thought and work of the most advanced women of your race, and should therefore interest you.
Because it will keep you informed on matters you cannot afford to be ignorant of.
Because being a woman's movement, it is bound to succeed.
Because it is readable, it contains sixteen pages of solid matter, no plate matter, reprints, no filling up with headings and leads.
Because its subscription price is only one dollar a year.MUSICAL INSTRUCTION
JULY AND AUGUST.Summer School of Music
IN THE
Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute,
COTTAGE CITY. MASS.Four hundred to seven hundred students each season. Lessons in Piano, (practise Clavier Method), Singing, Harmony, Counterpoint and Musical Composition.Regular Course in Literature, Science and Art.A strong faculty of Eminent Teachers.ADDRESS,
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M,, Director of Boston Training School of Music.
20 Music Hall Building,
BOSTON, - MASS.BOSTON
Condensed Milk Co.'s
Plain condensed (unsweetened) Milk Is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. Sold in jars at the office, 2 1/2 Park Sq., Boston. Delivered three times per week.
ENDORSEMENT.
I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak, puny baby into a strong, plump one, after all other foods had failed.
MRS. MCGILL.
10 Lindall Place, Boston.F. S. BUTLER, Practical Tailor,
84 Mason St., Room 4, Boston. 
Ladies' and Gent's Clothing Cleansed Dyed, Repaired and Altered.MISS R. A. SMITH, Fashionable Dressmaker,
Orders promptly executed. All work guaranteed.
37 Anderson St., - Boston.Madame S. G. IRVEN'S FASHIONABLE
DRESSMAKING PARLORS,
KANSAS CITY, MO.
Colored Women's League, 1027 Charlotte St.MISS G. H. WILLIAMS,
BUSINESS ADVISER. 
Hours for Consultation,  4 P.M. to 9 P.M.
48 Charles St., Boston.
Trustworthy advice given on ALL subjects.HOUSEWIVES
Buy your Kerosene Oil and get the best water white oil off
C. H. YANCEY & BROTHERS, 
34 Kendall Street, Boston Mass.
Drop us a postal card, and we will call.
Because of the superior quality of this oil many members of the W. E. have pledged themselves to patronize these dealers.DR. R. B. CALLAWAY, DENTIST,
333 Tremont Street,  Boston.
OFFICE HOURS
9 A.M. to 1 P.M., and 1.30  to 6 P.M.Use Dr. Callaway's Saponaceous Tooth Powder. Price 25 Cents.M.D. JONES & CO.
REMOVED TO
368 WASHINGTON ST.,  BOSTON.
Cemetery Requisites
Decoration Day Supplies
Send for illustrated price listMCKENZIE & SMALLWOOD,
DEALERS IN
FINE : FOOTWEAR
OF ALL KINDS.
We also have with us Mr. PEGRAM, a first class shoemaker. Repairing neatly done. Also shoes made to order.
145 Cambridge St., Boston.THE
Great Historical Book
OF THE PRESENT TIME.
The Assassination of
LINCOLN,
By GEN. T. M. HARRIS.
A member of the Commission which tried the Assassins
Should be in every Household. 
PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED. 
Price in cloth, $2.50; hall Morocco, $3.50; full Morocco, $5.00.American Citizen Co.
7 Bromfeld St., Boston.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 4. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.DO YOU WANT
TO OWN YOUR OWN HOME?
THEN READ THIS!IF YOU WANT TO BUY A HOUSE IN CAMBRIDGE, SOMERVILLE, DORCHESTER OR EVERETT . . . IT WILL PAY YOU TO CALL ONBALDWIN & DORSEY, Real Estate, Mortgage and Insurance Brokers,They make a specialty of property in the suburbs.
They furnish purchase money at low rates of interest.
They will lend you money to build a house on your own land.Stop! Pay no more Rent!  Begin now to buy your own home!BALDWIN & DORSEY, 
Real Estate, Mortgages and Insurance,
555 MAIN STREET,  CAMBRIDGEPORT.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
OF BOSTON Street Railway Builders and Contractors for Public Works.ESTIMATES MADE FOR A COMPLETE UNDERGROUND SYSTEM.GEO. S. BARNES. President.
STANLEY RUFFIN, Sec'y and Treas.
34 School Street, Boston.J.P. BOND & CO.
Gentlemen's Furnishing Goods,
Shirts, Cuffs and Collars.
Business and Dress Shirts, $1 .00 and $ 1.50--Best Value. Cheviots, Percales,
and Fancy Shirts, 75c. to $2.00. 
Nice line of Hosiery and Underwear, Handkerchiefs, etc. Neckwear, 50c.
141 Dartmouth Street, - BOSTON.
DARTMOUTH LAUNDRY.The Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 5.BOSTON, MASS., AUGUST, 1894, PRICE 10 CENTS.THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the National Federation of Afro-American Women, and devoted to the Interests of the Women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country.Published monthly, in Boston, by JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, Editors and Publishers.SPECIAL CONTRIBUTORS.Medora W. Gould    Leslie WilmotMarion Ridley      Irene DeMortie    M. Elizabeth Johnson.SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Club Rates, one hundred copies,   -    7.00Subscriptions Payable in Advance.GREAT BRITAIN'S COMPLIMENT TO AMERICAN COLORED WOMEN Fannie Barrier WilliamsFANNIE BARRIER WILLIAMS.It has been often charged that the Negro is dull and uninteresting; that he has no racial characteristics that are "sui generis" ; no native impulses to deeds and achievements that leave an impress in human history, and no place but that of subserviency in the strife of nations. There may be a degree of truth in all this depressing estimate of his worth, yet we need not seek far to find refutations more or less complete. There are so many things that contradict and make ridiculous the old stereotyped conclusion concerning the Negro's mental and moral worth that it is not worth while to argue against them. It is much more agreeable and reassuring to make note of some of the evidences that there is a soulfulness and power of captivation every where amongst us that now and then. surprise and confound our enemies.We have recently been again reminded that we owe much to the people of England for their gracious recognition of the manhood and womanhood of the American Negro.Twenty years ago when the American people were still unaccustomed to regard-their colored fellow citizens as others than serfs, with no status of respectability in America the British people heard with rapturous delight the sweet singing students from Fish University. These unaffected students so won the hearts of all Britain that chivalry could scarcely go further than in the spontaneous attentions and compliments paid to them. The charm of Negro minstrelsy was not more pleasing to the sturdy Englishmen than the unexpected refinement of these women. Our character as women worthy of womanly recognition was then firmly established in England.The extraordinary interest aroused throughout England by Miss Ida B. Wells' thrilling recitals of American savagery is the further evidence of how British chivalry still regards the colored American woman. If the present manifestation of British sentiment in our behalf is higher pitched and more definite in its influence on American public opinion, it is because Miss Wells represents more intellectuality and a purpose that lifts her into the ranks of reformers. The unstinted social attentions paid to Miss Wells is a pleasing proof that British people are great hearted enough to pay just tribute both publicly and socially to those of our women who deserve it. What Miss Wells has accomplished in England strongly suggests the importance of a greater sense of conscious dignity and self respect among colored women.If the compliment paid to our womanhood in England means anything, it means that worthy women of the colored race will find more appreciation than they have dreamed of, if when they deserve such recognition they will but expect and demand it. It cannot be denied that our own prejudices are largely responsible for many of the disadvantages that are charged to the prejudice of the other race. There is a largeness and warmth of heart here in America that have not yet been discovered to us. These pleasant surprises that are constantly coming to us both at home and abroad, as an offset to race resistenceresistance which seems every where to confront us, should inspire us with renewed courage and conviction that there is a sense of justice, a philosophic calm of thoughtfulness all about us, that we can convert to our own use and uplifting, if we will but seek it heroically and in good temper.ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF WOMEN. Ednah D. CheneyEDNAH D. CHENEY.This admirable Association has now nearly reached its twenty-second year of work, and it would be difficult to estimate the influence it has exerted, and the amount of good it has done.Its object has been exactly what its name expresses; viz. to help women forward in every line of progress moral, intellectual, political, social, and industrial. Its plan of work has been, to hold a congress of women at some central city in the autumn of each year, at which may be discussed any subject affecting women's welfare.Such meetings have been held at such distant points as St. Paul Minnesota, Memphis Tennessee, Louisville Kentucky, Denver Colorado, as well as in Chicago, Buffalo, Baltimore, Philadelphia and other Eastern cities.In every city visited, but most notably in the Western and Southern cities, the Congress has left the traces of its presence, and many an important institutions such as the Women's Exchange, and the Woman's Club may be traced to its influence. Everything we have we can trace to the Congress has been said in more than one city, and the Association has often been urged to repeat its visit.The fee for membership is only two dollars a year, and besides the privileges of attending the Congress and taking part in its private discussions, the members even if not present at the meeting receive the printed reports of all that is done there.A.A.W. does not exclusively advocate any one reform, but is anxious to present with perfect fairness all sides of important questions. The Woman Sufferage question has not of course been neglected, and among its members may be found ardent advocates for it, and remonstrants against it. They frequently therefore hold a symposium in which all aspects of the case tire presented., often bringing out a lively discussion. It is interesting to see how wide-spread is the interest in this movement. In a city where is was supposed that other topics would be more desirable, the directors found to their surprise that so much disappointment was felt when it was found that this was not included in the programme, that they were obliged to arrange for an extemporaneous symposium which proved to be one of the most brilliant features of the session.The morning meetings which are confined to members only, are very interesting, as the Vice-Presidents report from each state, and bring out many important facts and much interesting discussion.As it is a great object to unite all the women of the country, not in an iron-clad organization, but in cordial union of mutual interest and good feeling, the association has desired for some years to extend its work among the Southern states, where there is much new life thought among the women. Their reception at Memphis was very cordial and the meeting most successful. It was delightful to hear the noble "Hymn of the Republic" read by its author and responded to by the whole audience, in the city which had always been associated in our minds with gunboats, and shot and shell between the opposing armies in the civil war.This year it is proposed to visit Knoxville in Tennessee, and afterwards to extend the journey to Atlanta, Ga., to visit the well known University which is doing so much to provide a higher education for the people of Georgia, and also the admirable industrial school at Tuskegee, Ala.While the Association does not take up as a special work the defence of any one race or class of people, it does feel very strongly that in just and harmonious relations between all the various races and people who help make up the American nation, rests the only hope of firm and substantial well-being for all, and it is therefore earnest in its desire to promote good feeling between all sections of the country, and all classes of the people.The welfare of the colored people is not forgotten, and while trying to emphasize distinctions of color as little as possible, they feel that the women who have come out from such deep experience of suffering have important lessons to teach, and that both for them and for all, their education and advancement is of great importance.One measure which was suggested and urged at the Congress at Louisville, Ky., the training of colored women as nurses, is rapidly spreading through many states, and young women are seeking opportunity for the best training at the North, that they may be fitted to take charge of the classes which are established at Hampton and several other schools in the South. The letters in the ERA by Miss Burgess shows how well these pupils have profited by their opportunities. It would be very interesting to have reports from other schools lately established.The great object of the Association is to awaken thought among women and lead them to a just appreciation of the duties and meaning of life wherever their lot may be cast, feeling sure that in this way they cannot fail to promote "The Advancement of Women."THE COLLEGE SETTLEMENTS.Ella Lavinia SmithELLA LAVINIA SMITH.Paper No. 1.In one of Hamlin Garland's short stories "Up the Coule," he puts into the mouth of a woman the following words : "It's nothing but fret, fret and work the whole time, never going any place, never seeing anybody but a lot of neighbors just as big fools as you are. I spend my time fighting flies and washing dishes and cleaning. I'm sick of it all."The pathetic words of that poor housewife on a miserable western farm express in spirit, if not in form, the feelings of thousands of men and women all over our land.All about us are human beings struggling not alone for existence, but for life. A life enriched and made endurable by enjoyment of some of the countless advantages offered by the civilization of these last years of the nineteenth century. How drearily futile seem their efforts, needs not the pen of Hamlin Garland nor General Booth to depict. We have only to go, with our eyes and hearts open, into the great metropolitan poor districts of our American cities, and into the southern and western farm regions to learn for ourselves "how the other half lives," and to discover that there are more things in the life immediately about us than are dreamed of in our history, economics, or even in our philosophy.And yet, though our investigation may reveal much sin, misery and suffering, we may also find that the outlook is not so dark as it may sometimes seem but that both theoretical and practical reformers are forwarding numerous general movements, political, economic, educational and religious for the purpose of bringing about greater harmony between those who ride upon and those who draw the industrial coach described by Bellamy in "Looking Backward."But though the law, public and private charities, benevolent societies and institutions, and the churches have accomplished much in their particular lines of work, yet there are avenues of life into which they have never entered, and great masses of our country and large city populations which they have never effectively reached.It is in the homes and lives of these people where tort and suffering are the common inheritance, and where there is almost total ignorance of what peace and love are that we find the objective need for the social organizations conducted for the most part by college and university bred men and women and known as College Settlements.The settlements are not missions; they are not charitable institutions; but to quote the churchman of Nov. 19, 1892, "The settlement is simply a houseful of open hearted and intelligent men or women who approach the poor, not as visitants from another world, but as dwellers in the same block or ward, as finding a pleasure (and it is a real pleasure and not a fictitious one) in the acquaintance of their fellow-inhabitants and as claiming a share in the life of that quarter of the town, and a right to contribute whatever they may have in the way of books, or music, or pictures, or general information, or meeting rooms and acquaintances to the well being of the community to which they belong. This establishes the relation of the settlement to its environment as natural instead of artificial; it leaves no room for patronage on the one side or servility on the other."The men and women residents have learned in a measure how to live the higher life themselves, and they believe in the utilization and saving power of every influence which tends to bring men and women closer to the human ideal.The lines of work along which they labor are varied, intricate and well defined. Indeed, perhaps the most striking characteristic of the settlement movement is its flexibility. All details of the development of the worker's ideas of social intercourse are left to the neighborhood to determine, and every department of work grows out of some discovery made by means of natural and reciprocal social relations.The wider knowledge and liberal training of the settlement workers enable them to take a scientific as well as philanthropic interest in the problems of life around them, and to see how factors from other forms of life may be introduced to aid in their solution and how the scope and influence of agencies that are already working toward social and economic unity may be enlarged.They work all the more effectively because they recognize in the colleges and universities themselves, and in the society of the rich, cultured and

refined a subjective need for the settlements almost as great as the objective need. They have begun to realize that if their cherished educational and social institutions are to last, they must share the higher life for which they stand, with the great masses of working people and not be satisfied until the best influence of our civilization have penetrated all the ramifications of society.The benefit to the residents themselves are not only negative, but positive, for as the Secretary of the editorial board of the American College Settlement Association expresses it, "Those who come to us expecting to give all and receive nothing soon find their mistake, for the help is mutual, and both we and our neighbors are richer for the new friendship and new outlook."REMINISCENCES.Thos. B. HiltonBY THOS. B. HILTON.WOODFORK AND NANCY PRINCE.The allusion to that heroic Christian worker and philanthropist above mentioned among the reminiscences contained in your last publication calls to mind the following incident of which some now living were eye-witnesses, an account of which may be interesting to many of your readers.Most of the old residents of Boston had either seen or heard of Woodfork. In fact throughout the entire north no slaveholder's name was more familiar and no name more dreaded by those residents who had escaped from southern bondage than this inhuman cowardly kidnapper. Many a poor fugitive had been tracked by him and sent back to his so-called master. And he seemed to get along in his nefarious work unharmed.In the year 1847 Woodfork visited Boston. And his presence here was evidence that he was on the track of some one that had fled from slavery and who was known, or supposed to be, in this vicinity, which proved to be literally true, for he had not been in Boston many hours before his form was seen in that section of the city where the great body of the colored people were known to reside. Although but few recognized him it seemed to be circulated about that a slave holder was hovering around. This information, which our people in those times were so accustomed to hear, was enough to keep their eyes and ears on the alert. One day between eleven and twelve o'clock A. M., there was a ripple of excitement in the rear of Smith's Court off Belknap Street. It seemed that some children had come out of the court and reported that a slave holder was in Mrs. Dorsey's, a woman who, by some means, had succeeded in shaking off oppressions yoke and reaching Boston. This news, which was always enough to make our people drop everything and go to the rescue, was verified in this instance.It being working hours scarcely a colored man was seen in the vicinity; but, as it proved, there were those around that showed themselves equal to the occasion. Among these was Mrs. Nancy Prince (widow of Nero Prince), a colored woman of prominence in Boston who, with several others, learning that it was indeed true and that the slave holder was none other than the notorious Woodfork, hurried to the scene. Mrs. Prince had seen this kidnapper before and therefore knew him by sight; and they all started with the determination to thwart him at all hazards. It looked as if the cunning rascal had purposely selected an opportunity when he knew she was alone and no one seemingly around to enter her house. The woman was dumfounded at the sight of her so-called master and scarcely knew what to do or say, and he seeing her dilemadilemma quickly announced to her that she was apprehended and would soon be in the hands of an officer, but that she could escape this trouble by going immediately with him. It was while this palaver was going on, which was all on one side, for his very presence had seem to paralyze the woman, for be stood with arms and hands outstretched and moving like the wings of a vampire. It was while this was in progress that the friends arrived, who immediately and without ceremony entered the house.Only for an instant did the fiery eyes of Mrs. Prince rest upon the form of the villianvillain, as if to be fully assured that it was he, for the next moment she had grappled with him, and before he could fully realize his position she, with the assistance of the colored women that had accompanied her, had dragged him to the door, and thrust him out of the house. By this time quite a number, mostly women and children had gathered near by (Mrs. Chloe Cabot Thomas of the old ladies' home on MrytleMyrtle Street, Boston, being one of the number), whom Mrs. Prince commanded to come to the rescue, telling them to "pelt him with stones and any thing you can get a hold of," which order they proceeded to obey with alacrity. And the slave holder, in whose countenance surprise and alarm seemed clearly depicted and evidently con-

vinced that he had lost the opportunity of securing his victim, started to retreat, and with his assailants close upon him ran out of the court into Belknap street."Down which they drove,In dreadful race,Pursuers and pursued."Only once did the man turn in his head-long flight when, seeing them streaming after him terribly in earnest, their numbers constantly increasing and hearing in his ears their exultant cries and shouts of derision he redoubled his speed and, turning the corner into Cambridge street was soon lost to view.Mrs. Dorsey did not leave Boston, but by the advice of friends changed her abiding place to where she would be less likely to be surprised or retaken. But she was never afterwards molested. Nor was Woodfork again seen in this vicinity until 1850 when, in attempting to arrest a fugitive in Old Cambridge he was again put to flight in a similar manner; an account of which may be given hereafter.WOMEN AT HOME Marie Louise BurgessMarie Louise Burgess.THE DIXIE HOSPITAL AND HAMPTON TRAINING SCHOOL FOR NURSES.Among the many avenues opened to the colored girls of the south, is that of trained nursing. In June, 1891, the Dixie Hospital was first opened to receive intelligent colored women for training as nurses. It was thought that intelligent nursing ought to take the place of the granny nursing which for so many years has been the main nursing of the southern people. The Dixie Hospital was the avenue by which Hampton and the surrounding country was to receive nurses who were to be trained, and like others of their profession to stand side by side with the physician in caring for the sick and the afflicted.In the first class there were only two nurses, but by the end of the year there were five. During that time there had been thirty seven patients cared for in the hospital wards. These five nurses above mentioned were Anna De Costa, Rosa Dunstan, seniors; Alberta Boyd, Susie J. Rix, Eliza Blackman, juniors, they were Hampton graduates, excepting Rosa Dunstan who had been promoted to the senior class, and took her year out in the training school. All of these were bright intelligent young women, and a better class of nurses could not be found elsewhere.This Hospital was incorporated in March, 1892, although started before the Provident training school in Chicago, the latter by being incorporated first, is counted the older.The thought of starting this noble work, came from Miss Alice M. Bacon, one of Hampton's earnest workers and teachers, one who believes sincerely in a bright future for the negro girl. The hospital is a neat frame building, painted light yellow, has two good sized wards, one male, the other female; and private rooms where private patients are accommodated; adjoining this building is the nurse's home, with all the conveniences of home life so that no nurse can be lonely.The lecture and operating rooms are in this building.  The Supt. Miss Sarah Connacher is a graduate of the Waltham Training School, for nurses at Waltham, Mass. She is a very able instructor and matron. The nurses wear the usual blue and white seersucker dresses so popular in training schools of this country, the dainty white cap, cuffs and aprons.The first class of nurses, did not have the comforts of a nurses home, but like true missionaries put up with the best that was given them and saw only the work which wits before them, during their senior year they were able to enjoy the Home.The amount of charity work done by these nurses cannot be realized, but the cheerfulness with which the work is performed would lead one to believe that nothing unpleasant ever came into their lives. They go from case to case caring for suffering humanity, walking sometimes miles to their cases and back again in the evening. Every one who knows the Dixie nurses, loves and respects them. The guests of the Hygeia Hotel have employed a great many and the best doctors in the neighborhood demand their service. Some have been to New York, others to Norfolk and cities near Hampton.During the past year a maternity building has been added.This institution is supported by subscriptions, and donations.Lectures are given daily for one hour to the juniors during the term in anatomy, obstetrics, medicines, and their administration, massage, 
bandaging and general training, special subjects connected with nursing, and special surgical cases, physiology, cholera and surgery.The instructors are physicians in the neigborhoodneighborhood.Applicants for admission must be between twenty-one and thirty-five, have a good common school education be sound mentally, morally and physically. The term is two years, although a certificate is given to those who satisfactorily complete a fifteen month's course.This is an excellent opportunity for young women who wish to grasp it. What an excellent thing it would be if the race would become interested in this Hospital; show some appreciation of the work, there is much that could be done if only the effort were made.As a race I fear we are thoughtless, we grasp every opportunity but give little thought to the origin and growth of it. Let us think seriously and see what we are doing for the race; if we are doing nothing, let us try and begin to do something.THE WELLS ENDORSEMENT MEETING.So much has already been published in the daily and weekly papers concerning the Wells Endorsement Meetings held in many places, in quick response to the call of President T. T. Fortune of the Afro-American League, that nothing remains for us to say that has not already been said, except to thank the Boston League for their hearty co-operation in the matter. The assistance of ex-president Walker was sought and the result was a dignified meeting managed by the League, which plainly indicated Boston's feelings on the subject. Eloquent manly speeches were made by President Emory Morris, E. G. Walker, Esq., E. E. Brown, Esq., Revs. Scott and Kirke, and Dr. Roberts, and the Woman's Era Club was in it from the start, and through one of the members had the last word at it.HONOR TO WHOM HONOR IS DUE.Mr. Henry L. Shrewsbury of Cheraw, S. C., has completed the erection of a good schoolhouse which is all paid for and which he has named for the Secretary of the Teachers' Committee of the N. E. Freedman's Aid Society, Mrs. Ednah D. Cheney. The school owns ten acres of land, which is laid out in half acre lots for homes for the people. Several of these lots are already sold and the settlement is named Cheneyville. Success to the enterprise.FREE!Splendid Premium Offers.By special arrangement with the Boston Training School of Music, the Woman's Era is enabled to offer the following splendid premiums which offer we venture to say is unprecedented.FIRST PREMIUM.READ. To the one who obtains the largest number of subscribers, over one hundred, within the next six mouths we will give one year's tuition either in voice, violin, piano or harmony and counterpoint at the above-named school.SECOND PREMIUM.For the second highest number of subscribers in the next six months we will offer a term at the Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute for the summer of '94 with Instructions either in music, art, literature, elocution, oratory or shorthand and type-writing.THIRD PREMIUM.For the three children over nine years of age, first obtaining fifty subscribers for us, a years instruction on piano. This is for beginners.FOURTH PREMIUM.To all contestants failing to gain the premiums we will give a commission of twenty-five per cent.The Boston Training School of Music makes a specialty of the training of teachers of music, it is a school of the highest grade and for these reasons and because this school has made no distinction on account of race, the management of this paper has selected it for its premium offer. The number of young people who come to Boston for a musical education increases yearly; through these premiums it is hoped to give a helping hand to worthy aspirants.A course in piano, voice, violin, theory or harmony and counter point at the finest school of its kind in the country.For further particulars address the Woman's Era, St. Augustine's Trade Schools, North Grove Street, Boston, Mass.GEORGE L. RUFFIN,
LESSONS IN SINGING.
Lamperti Method.
AFTER OCTOBER 1st,
103 Charles Street.A STRONG HELPER IN ENGLAND.C.N. FieldLETTER FROM FR. FIELD.The Mission House S.S.J.E.
Oxford, England.Dear Mrs. Ruffin,Thank you for the copy of the WOMAN'S ERA just received.Upon my arrival in Liverpool I began at once to fulfil my promise to you and to others that I would tell the people in England of the injustice done to the colored citizens of the United States. I found the greatest sympathy from the clergy and laity, and an anxiety to hear the truth from an impartial witness.It was a matter of great regret to me that Miss Ida B. Wells had left England before I arrived as I should have been only too glad to have met her on the platform and endorsed her statements. She has won a great many friends for herself and for the cause which we have at heart. England knows enough to sympathize with the colored people in the states in their efforts to obtain justice. and to improve themselves. The Daily News, the Spectator and the Contemporary Review have had splendid articles upon the subject. These represent the daily, the weekly and the monthly press, but in spite of the information which these have given the English people have comparatively little knowledge of the state of affairs.I have spoken to many of the clergy in London and Oxford and asked them to raise their voice at every opportunity on behalf justice to the colored people. The English people love justice and have no prejudice and hear with the greatest interest of the efforts which colored people are making to improve their position. Many persons have been surprised to hear of the talent which has been shown by some in literature and art, and of the refinement and culture of many of the men and women vastly superior to many of a fairer complexion. The imprudence of some has done the cause harm even here, but the more visits England can have from people like Miss Wells the more they will be welcomed. I am sure that the WOMAN'S ERA may be a useful means of communication between the women on both sides.Yesterday I saw the Bishops of Lincoln and of Reading, and in a few days I hope to see the Bishops of London and of Ripon, and to all of them I hope to explain impartially the position of affairs in America.You may be sure that I shall lose no opportunity of speaking a word to obtain sympathy for those whom I have learned to love and work for in Christ's Holy Church.May God bless your work, and especially the WOMAN'S ERA.Yours faithfully,C.N. FIELD, S.J.R.OXFORD, July 12, 1894.GREAT SUFFERING STILL EXISTS IN THE SEA ISLANDS. We have taken the liberty to publish extracts from the following private letter which explains itself. Any friends desiring to help in this urgent cause can by writing to the "Lend a Hand" office or, better still, by calling on Capt. Christensen at his home, 17 Harvard Street, Brookline, get full and reliable information:BROOKLINE,July 25, 1894. Dear Mrs. Ruffin,The letters that came to us from South Carolina describe a sad state of affairs there.The spring drouthdrought has been followed by deluges of rain which threaten destruction to the crops. A letter that came to me yesterday begs that something more may be done and laments the unintentional cruelty of the Red Cross in printing false reports that the sufferers are provided for. The truth is that famine is at the door. Many of the people are sick from eating the unripe corn all are at their wits end to know what to do next. The seed being different from usual and the planting late, besides the delays from first drouthdrought and then excessive rain, all conspire to hinder the crops and belate them, so that it is likely they will he late by five weeks at least.Mr. C. gave out rations till he came away and since then two other merchants, one after another have carried on the work, but funds are now exhausted. Accounts of the use of twenty-five dollars show over seven hundred people fed for two weeks with grits from it. A little does a great deal. The trouble is there are so many destitute. Do you think a contribution at Trinity could be taken for them? I don't know what can be done. The "Lend a Hand" has sent the last they could get about two weeks back.I wish I were a good beggar. But I'm not well at all--have had a week's illness that has left me quite weak.Yours sincerely,ABBIE H. CHRISTENSEN. ADVERTISE IN THE WOMAN'S ERA THE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTEREST OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.The WOMAN'S ERA, as the organ of the colored women's clubs, has a large circulation in many of the large cities, notably Boston, New Bedford, Providence, New York, Chicago, Washington and Kansas City.The Literary, Musical, and Domestic Departments are under the control of competent writers and critics.With its large circulation among women, and particularly among women of the refined and educated classes, it offers peculiar advantages to advertisers of household articles, wearing apparel, books, magazines, musical instruments, and so forth.Its rates are exceedingly liberal.Try it, and you will not regret it.EDITORIAL.Mr. Fortune.Mr. Fortune has again demonstrated himself as a man of courage and energy in the calling of the meetings for the support of Miss Wells and her work. Such men as Mr. Fortune is, are natural leaders; they should take such a position and hold it in the face of opposition. The race puts itself in it pitiable position by refusing to support capable leaders; it seems to us that the only solution for us is for leaders to lead. Men of ability and brains stand back waiting for the whole-souled support that does not come or grow discouraged at the hindrances thrown in the way by the jealous and ignorant. So called high-handedness is justifiable in some instances, and it would be laudable if practised by some of our capable ones. Let them take a hand at the reins, hold the place and compel a following. It would come.The Silence of Mrs. Chant.At the time of the publication of the open letter to Mrs. Chant there were some of her friends who felt so confident that there had been some mistake that she (Mrs. Chant) was not capable of taking the position ascribed her, that they protested against our letter and expressed the opinion that we should soon have an emphatic denial from her.That was two months ago; as yet there is the first word to be heard from Mrs. Chant. Her silence may mean many things, so as it is the virtual acknowledgement of her position as a sympathizer with lynchers and a contemptuous indifference to those who espouse the cause of the lynched. To the many colored women who have been enthusiastic listeners to Mrs. Chant's talks, this will come as a blow, but it is not the first of the kind we have received. It shows the great and pressing need of uniting.Notes.Mrs. A.J. Cooper of Washington, author of "A Voice from the South," is taking charge editorially of the Southern Workman for the summer months. It is a pity that "A Voice from the South" has never been put on sale in Boston. There have been not a few inquiries concerning it.Following is an extract from a letter to the editor from Mrs. Haryot Holt Cahoon of the N.Y. Recorder: "I laud you in your noble efforts. I lived south once for eight years. I know how badly the field of work among the colored race needs intelligent women workers. * * * How the world needs good able women.Assuring you that my best wishes are with you and that I am thoroughly interested in the cause for the betterment and uplifting of all, I am sincerely yours."This month we begin a fine series of articles on College Settlements by Miss Ella Smith, Newport and Howard University of Washington. College Settlements are hardly out of the experimental stage and their motive, methods and success up to this time are subjects of great interest to students of economics and charitable workers. Miss Smith is a graduate of Wellesley College taking the B. A. degree in 1888, and that of M. A. in 1892. She is well posted on the subject of settlmentssettlements and her articles will be read with interest and pleasure.Enough matter is crowded out of this issue of the ERA to fill another. If the friends of this movement will only give us as large financial as we get literary support, we will be justified in

turning this journal from a monthly into a bi-monthly.Until further notice correspondents are requested to send all letters, money orders, etc., to 103 Charles Street.Were it not for the fact that some people get their law and gospel from the newspaper they read it would seem not to be worth while to notice an indirect charge made in an article which appeared in the Sunday Globe of recent date, of sectional rivalry between colored people of the south and west ends of Boston. No such rivalry exists. Each one of the "leaders " mentioned in that article are trying to play their little part in the scheme of life with dignity and honor, and without rancor of rivalry. Earnest women have no time nor inclination for such pettiness.NEWS FROM THE CLUBS.KANSAS CITY LETTER.J. Silone YatesThe July ERA, as predicted, was an unusually good number, full of interesting facts and of the good deeds of our sister leagues.We were pleased to read from the pen of that brave little woman, Miss Ida B. Wells, and to learn from her letter from the copy of the Westminster Budget which she sent to the Kansas City League and from other reliable sources that her work is leaving an impression upon the public mind which must in the near future be productive of far reaching results. The more agitators and propagandists along the line the better for our cause, and the formation of Women's League devoted to the improvement of colored women and the promotion of their interests will, if properly conducted, become a potent factor in developing and disseminating those ideas which must form the bed-rock of any argument for equal rights in America; while the possession of such a magazine as the ERA will give force to the movement and contribute largely toward welding the various organizations into one complete whole, thus rendering work for the race more effective.The ERA is at all times on sale at 1027 Charlotte Street, and the number of subscribers increases monthly. Dr. Scrugg's book, "Women of Distinction," is also on sale at the some place, and the league is hopeful of disposing of a large number of copies of this work which the doctor has compiled in so creditable a manner, and which, like many other literary productions of our race, should find a welcome place in every home.During the month of May, Madame Cora Watson-Griffin gave a very successful concert for the benefit of the league. At the weekly meetings several interesting papers and talks have been given; we may especially mention those by Miss Worthem, Mesdames, Mallory, Handy and Allen.A series of Demorest Medal Contests will soon be given by the Temperance Section.A children's sewing class is held every Wednesday at 3 P.M. Parents are urged to send their little ones to this class where they may learn plain sewing, fancy stitches and the elements of dressmaking, free of charge. A good home in a Christian family has been secured for one of the girls from the sewing school, and she is now making her own living and assisting a disabled parent.Aprons, wrappers, underwear, etc., are constantly on sale at the room, and ice-cream is served daily, Sunday excepted.We look forward with pleasure to the August ERA, believing that new ideas are gained and possible difficulties avoided by this personal contact, as it were with our co-laborers.Yours for the race,J. SILONE YATES.The officers of Ruth and Adar Chapters, benevolent orders, were installed at a recent meeting by B.B. Francis, Past W.P. of Ruth Chapter.The following are the officers of Ruth Chapter: Mrs. D.R. Francis, Worthy Matron; Mrs. Lillie Payne, Associate Matron; Mrs. J.H. Crews, Treasurer; Mrs. Lulu Whittington, Secretary; Mrs. Mary Smith, Associate Conductress; James H. Crews, Worthy Patron.Officers of Ada Chapter: Mrs. L.A. McCampbell, Worthy Matron; Mrs. Elvira Foster, Associate Matron ; Mrs. Celia Lawson, Secretary; Mrs. Julia Wilson, Conductress ; Mr. J.W. Richardson, Worthy Patron.The annual session of the Grand Chapter for the State of Missouri will convene at Independence, Wednesday, July 18.J.S.Y.
PROVIDENCE, R.I.July 8, 1894.The Sojourner's Truth Club give a lawn party on the grounds of Miss Mary E. Jackson, July 5, the proceeds being for the benefit, of a sewing school soon to be established in this city.E. Yurner,President.L.V. Johnson,Cor. Secretary.LETTER FROM BIRMINGHAM, ALA.Mrs. J.R. EnglandLast month a letter from Miss Ghant from Birmingham, Ala., was published. This month we publish extracts from one from Mrs. J. R. England, one of the leading and active ladies of that city. The letter showing something of the work of the women of that city will be interesting to our readers.BIRMINGHAM, ALA.Just about the time your letter was received we were preparing for a Woman's Convention in our city; this kept me quite busy. We had a large number of delegates from all over the state and a grand time. The women were deeply interested and among other things raised the sum of two hundred and thirty-three dollars for the Baptist school at Selma. I myself gave a talk on the work of the women in the north and east and many subjects concerning women and the home were discussed. I think the ERA is just what we need and is indeed worth the cost. The women here are doing good work, although mostly in charitable and literary lines. We expect soon to join you in forming it league.I think a convention for the interchange of thoughts, for the planning of ways and means a splendid idea, not the least among its benefits is the inspiration it would give our women; but we should not be in a hurry, we should prepare well and carefully. I should like to see this section well represented and have the subject thoroughly agitated here. It seems to me that '95 is soon enough to think of holding the convention.Very truly yours,MRS. J.R. ENGLAND.Woman's Era Club.H. SmithMotto: Help to make the world better.The Woman's Era Club held their last regular meeting for the season on Thursday evening, June 20, in the Sunday school room of St. Augustine Church to meet again for work on the third Thursday in September. Important business was transacted, Article III of the Constitution was amended, "to read all names presented for membership shall be balloted for and will be elected if receiving the votes of two-thirds of the members present. This plan to go into operation at the opening of the fall meeting of the club. The list of names offered for membership was laid over for the first fall meeting. A committee consisting of the treasurer, Mrs. T. Taylor, Mrs. M. L. Richards, Mrs. C. Hall and Mrs. S. Johnson were appointed to bank all the money now in the treasury, reserving enough for necessary expenses. The Woman's Era Club has now joined the grand army of clubs, having received the report through their president that they are now one with the "Massachusetts State Federation of Women's Clubs," having complied with the rules and paid the annual fee. The Woman's Era Club closes the year with hopes of a future that will be filled with good works; they are ambitious and indulge in dreams that have been fully realized by some of our sister clubs.H. SMITH,Recording Secretary W. E. Club.The Women's Loyal Union.New York and Brooklyn.The Woman's Loyal Union held a special meeting Monday afternoon, September 23, at room 61, Bible House. There was not even standing room, ladies having to stand in the hall without. Mrs. Victoria Mathews, president, presided. The meeting was called to protest against Southern mob violence, and to endorse Miss Ida B. Wells as a public agitator for the rights of our people everywhere. Among the speakers was Mrs. E. Stephen Mathews, a distinguished English lady, a temperance union organizer, delegate from Great Britain to the World's Columbian Fair; Prof. Scarborough of Wilberforce, T.T. Fortune, and our Canon Wilberforce, Dr. W.B. Derrick. The meeting was splendidly enthusiastic. Bishop Turner was also commended for his quick and courageous defence of Miss Wells when the associated press despatches chronicled condemnatory words alleged to have been uttered by a prominent lawyer of Washington, D.C., which bas since been denied. The Woman's Loyal Union recognize manly courage and the fearless exercise of the same, even though environed by Southern intimidation, as Bishop Turner ever is, hence they authorized Dr. W.B. Herrick to acquaint him with a resolution of appreciation.CORRECTION.The mother of Miss Theodora Lee of Chicago, writes to say that the statement made in the last issue of the ERA concerning the engagement of her daughter is incorrect.Social_Notes.Mr. and Mrs. C. G. Foster of Prince Street, Cambridge, have been entertaining Mrs. Harry C. Lewis and children of Brooklyn, and Miss Helen St. Clair and brother of Cincinnati, who were en route for Canada. On the 14th they gave a delightful "drag" party, starting from Brookline and driving through Concord and Lexington where a delightful dainty luncheon was served on the green. The party consisted of twelve.NEWPORT.Miss Ella Smith of Newport gave a delightful supper to celebrate the birthday of Mrs. Mary Evans Wilson on the evening of July 2d. Mrs. Wilson honored the occasion by appearing in her wedding dress, an exceedingly rich affair of bengaline silk and chiffon. Two immense bride and groom cakes were among the ornaments of the sumptuous table. Toasts were responded to by the bride; the groom, Mr. Alphonso Stafford of Washington, and by Miss Smith. The table decorations were in red.Mrs. Silas Dickerson of Newport, after many years suffering from indigestion has obtained immediate and entire relief through Christian Science treatment; she is now an enthusiastic student of the science, and with her renewed health and spirits is a most interesting talker upon the subject.Prof. Geo. W. Cook of Howard University, as usual, spent a few days in Newport during July.Mrs. Charles W. Boyd of Brooklyn has gone to Newport for the summer.Mrs. James W. Baxter and family, and Mrs. Estelle Jarvis of New York are in Newport for the summer.PHILADELPHIA.Sea Island city air seems drawing to Philadelphia clergymen particularly. Rev. 0.M. Waller of St. Thomas Church and Rev. H. L. Phillips of the Church of the Crucifixion have purchased homes there and are most comfortably, established. The Rev. W. V. Tunnell Dean of King Hall, Washington, D. C., and family will spend August there, as will also Rev. George J. Bragg of St. James Church, Baltimore, Md.Mr. and Mrs. Andrew F. Stevens and family have opened their Cape May Cottage and are entertaining a large number of friends. This popular resort will be gayer this year than usual. Mr. and Mrs. George Dickey have taken a cottage there. It is expected that Mr. and Mrs.. Terrell and Mr. and Mrs. Church will also add to the cottage life. Many Philadelphians will, as usual, summer there.The many Boston friends of Miss Maria Jones will be glad to know that she has recovered from a tedious illness which has confined her to the house for several weeks.The basket picnic of St. Thomas Church was such a success that it encouraged the Guild to give a lawn party on the l9th at Sweet Brier. Quite a number of strangers were in attendance.Miss Mollie Durham is in Brooklyn the guest of Mrs. W. L. Mars. Later in the season she will join her mother and sisters at Ellsview in that garden spot of Philadelphia, Chester County.BOSTON.Boston and Boston only will be "home" to many of our best girls and boys who, on the completion of their schooling here, go out into various parts of the country carrying their gifts and graces to contribute towards the world good work while making their own living at practicing the professions of medicine, law, preaching, teaching, and nursing.The love of Boston and the intense desire of the cultivated colored people to spend as much time as possible therein is pathetic. The agility shown by the Boston worker in southern. fields in getting home when school closes is only equaled by that shown by the clerks and sales people in a big dry goods establishment in getting out when the gong sounds. This is a great compliment to Boston atmosphere.The presence of many strangers in the city has, as usual, started the annual summer festivities. Of course a harbor party had to come, first one occurred on Thursday, July the 19th, and was followed by a reception on the next (Friday) evening given by Mrs. E. E. Brown at her home in Boston Highlands to her guests the Misses Wilson of Indianapolis, Ind. The Browns, a young married couple, are already noted for their abundant hospitality and whole heartedness, and the invitations for Friday evening were extended with their usual lavish hand, result, a crush of sweet girls in lovely summer dresses and fine boys in unlovely dress suits. All who were brave enough to face the rigors of that intensely hot night and don party clothes and gloves were made as comfortable and happy as congenial company, delicate viands, iced

drinks and sweet music (by an orchestra in the alcove off the parlor), could make them. Mrs. Mitchel and Mr. Geo. Ruffin sang, and the more courageous among the young people danced a little. All made the acquaintance of the stranger guests. These ladies are the sisters of that distinguished lady the wife of ex-senator Blanche K. Bruce, also ex-recorder of deeds at Washington, D. C.; however, they are not dependent for consideration on any reflected honor from their sister, having a charming and winning personality of their own of which dignified simplicity of manner is the most conspicuous feature. The Misses Wilson were born and begun life in Cleveland, Ohio, as public school teachers, later when it was determined to make the public school system of Indianapolis the best in the country by employing the best teachers tit the largest salaries, these young ladies among others were sent for to help carry out the scheme. They are hard working teachers with an intense love for their work. They have built a lovely home in the city of Indianapolis to which they have removed their loved and honored parents, Dr. and Mrs. Wilson. Their father was for years a successful dentist of Cleveland, Ohio. Doubtless many courtesies will be extended these ladies who are making their first visit to Boston. The strangers at the party were, besides the guests of honor, the Misses Howard, Miss Benjamin, Miss Florence Smith, Miss Hare of Cleveland, Ohio, Mrs. John Downing of Brooklyn, N. Y., Mr. R. G. L. Paige of Virginia, and Mr. Wibican of New York, Mr. W. H. Hackley of Chicago, Mr. Wm. H. Hunt of Groton, and Mr. Charles Moon of New York.Mr. R.G.L. Paige who has been in the city n for the past six weeks left Sunday night for his present home in Berkley, Va. "Dick" Paige, who early in life was compelled by his delicate health to leave Boston and seek relief from asthma in his native air, has grown rich and robust in Berkley. He came in June to Boston, his former home, to look for place and opportunity for some of his many sons, and reluctantly left the loved scenes of his school-boy days only on the repeated requests of his wife and eight children for,, "papa" to come home.Mr. and Mrs. Robert Teamoh received their friends at their home on West Cedar Street, Sunday, July 15. The bride was charming in her wedding gown.Messrs. Parker N. Bailey and W. P. Hare spent a week at Cottage City.Mr. and Mrs. Robert Hemmings and family are at Cottage City for the summer.Miss Marie Louise Burgess who is a regular valued contributor to the columns of this paper, made her exodus from the South with the rest of the Northern workers. Her field of action is at Hampton, where she is doing splendid work for her race and sex. Just now she is resting at the home of her aunt on Charles Street.Miss Elizabeth Johnson of the Women at Home Department of this paper, is already regaining her health and eyesight almost lost in overwork. She is a valued employee of Balch Bros. publishing house, and her place will doubtless be kept open for her until her complete restoration to health.Misses Etta Toliver and Mary Only are at Narragansett Pier.Mr. B.R. Wilson's gift to his bride was a grand piano.The Misses Washington who teach in LouisanaLouisiana are enjoying their well earned vacation and rest at their home at Boston Highlands.Dr. Milton D. Brown who graduated from the Harvard medical school in June last, has received a six months' appointment to the Boston City Hospital.Mr. Richard Lewis has returned from the North much tanned and very much stouter.Mr. Stanley Ruffin has removed his office to Hartford, Ct., from which city he has obtained a large contract for work which will take six months or more to complete. Mr. Honeysuckle the young man who lost a leg in a railroad accident it few years back, has been given a lucrative position, and accompanied the firm of Barnes & Ruffin as timekeeper for the workmen employed.Miss Maud E. Cuney left Boston for her home in Texas the early part of July.Mr. Sydney Woodward is to give a concert at Newport and one at Jamestown. He is to be byassisted Miss Georgie W. Glover, Mr. Edward Glover and Miss Edna Brown.Dr. and Mrs. Grant have returned to town from their bridal trip. They are in town only for a short time however, and will probably soon be an added pair to that colony of turtle doves now cooing at 29 Mary street, Newport.Miss Bessie Mitchell of New Bedford will spend the month of August in Newport. Misses Louisa Lewis and Mabel Grant of Boston, also

anticipate an August visit to that delightful city by the sea.Philadelphia has a welcome addition to its social life in the bride of Dr. Wm. Warwick. This lady who was much admired as Miss Bella Smith of New York, has won all hearts by tier winning charm of manner.NEW YORK.The Warick-Smith wedding was a very brilliant affair. It was said that more than four hundred presents were received; they were arranged on tables placed completely around a large room, leaving barely space enough for anyone to pass through. The fortunate couple departed under the fairest auspices for their future home, Germantown. New York's loss in this instance is the quaker city's gain, though this marriage bids fair to link New York, Brooklyn and Philadelphia socially closer than anything that has happened in recent years. All eyes are turned upon the whim-full, but winsome sister, Miss Kate Smith.Half of the town went down to spend the fourth at Asbury Park, White Head House. Among them were Miss Kate White, Brooklyn's leading young lady, chaperoned by Mrs. T. B. Frances; they will end the season at Saratoga its will also Mr. and Mrs. J. Pegram Williams and a host of popular young men.Mr. Joseph Attwell of Newark, N. J., is summering at Atlantic Highlands. Mr. Attwell has just returned after spending his vacation with his charming wife of only a few months.The many friends of Mrs. Jerome B. Peterson (nee White), will be pleased to learn that she is fast regaining her health. It was exceedingly sad that the joy over the advent of a beautiful son was so soon shrouded with gloom. It was a painful blow to the whole family.The King's Daughters "Willing Workers," Mrs. Dr. White, President, gave their annual afternoon and evening picnic which, despite the threatening weather, proved a most enjoyable affair.St. Philips P. E. Church Sabbath School excursion followed closely the King's Daughters affair, a success in every way. Among those who attended were Mrs. Dr. Warick, who came on from Philadelphia for the occasion. Mrs. Wm. C. Green, Mr. Potter, whose wedding occurred a week or so prior to the Warick-Smith. This happy young couple have chosen Brooklyn as their future residence.Miss J. Imogen Howard and sister have journeyed to Boston to enjoy a part of their vacation. They propose visiting a number of resorts before fall. Dame rumor has it that a certain foreign gentleman becoming disconsolate, owing to the fact that everybody was either out of town or going, acted on quick resolve and took the palatial steamer Puritan en route for Boston. Its interesting just why Boston.Mr. and Mrs. James E. Garner and daughter, the beautiful Miss Evangeline Walker of Brooklyn, left Saturday for Pittsfield, Mass., Mrs. Garners home.The Misses Florence and Cordelia Ray, school teachers, have decided to spend their much needed vacation in Stockbridge, Mass., at Mrs. Crispells' ideal homestead.Mrs. Dr. White in company with her daughter's fiancee, Mr. Chas. H. Lansing, left Saturday for Asbury Park.Mrs. Baker, mother-in-law to Rev. Hutchins C. Bishop, rector of St. Philips, is the guest of Mrs. C. A. Attwell of Putnam Avenue, Brooklyn.Dame rumor is responsible for whispering a most brilliant surprise in store for some of the intimate associates of Mrs. Harry T. Mars--Anon.The young and pretty bride of Dr. J. Frances Smith is slightly indisposed, suffering from the intense heat.Mr. S.M. Tucker, brother-in-law to Rev. H. C. Bishop, is in town in search of a matron for a school for young girls in the far south. Miss Marcelius Munday, a normal school graduate, was offered the position.The Woman's Loyal Union of New York and Brooklyn inaugeratedinaugurated the movement of indorsing Miss Wells by a special meeting held Monday afternoon, July 16, after which they co-operated with the evening meeting held at Zion's Church. The Union deserves unstinted praise for the courageous attitude it has taken, even though subjected to some mistaken judgment, it stands for principles not persons. Irrespective of personalities it firmly looks forward to the day when our people will discriminate between public and private matters with a truer discernment than is now shown.ANNO DOMINO, 1894.DEATH OF MRS. LOUISE WILSON.The first break has come in the W.E.C. in the death of Mrs. Louisa Wilson, which occurred July 18th. The Woman's Era Club has lost one of its earnest and most interested members. She was a member of the Domestic Science Committee of the Club, and was as active in the work as her delicate health would permit. She was also an old and respected member of the Female Benevolent Firm. She was buried from the Union Baptist Church, Cambridge, Sunday the 22nd, with the badges of both societies on her breast and her casket covered with floral tokens of esteem. The W.E.C. carried a large and beautiful token in the shape of a leaf made up of full blown white and pink roses. A husband and sweet mannered little girl are bereaved by this loss.LITERATURE DEPARTMENT.Medora M. GouldMEDORA M. GOULD."Never in the history of civilization have women been so honored, loved, privileged and trusted as at the present time," writes Mary A. Livermore in an article on the American Girl, published in a recent number of the Youth's Companion. What they do and what they are is to tell as never before on the national character. Therefore she appeals to the American girl to discard absurd and harmful fashions, and to cultivate a strong, healthy physique. To cease being superficial, inaccurate and unthorough. To embrace the ample opportunities offered for a higher education. The changed condition of life she says, which confront the girl of today, compel a larger education than has heretofore been deemed necessary. Women are to be weighted with larger duties and heavier responsibilities. The doors of colleges, universities and professional schools are open to them. They can pursue the same courses of study as their brothers and graduate with the same diplomas. She would, if possible, change the public sentiment so that every girl, no matter what her position in society, should not be considered thoroughly educated until she had learned a trade, business or profession and was self-supporting."Pembroke" is the title of a new novel by Mary E. Wilkins. It is, of course, a story of New England, and indicates that the success the author has attained in short stories is possible to her in a wider field. The story is a homely romance laid in a New England village, whose characters have a narrow range of life and a paucity of ideal incentives. It illustrates the power of a stubborn wilfulness, a family trait that in one person takes the form of a bigoted piety, and in another a blind perversity whose extreme exactings are amusing. In still another person the stubborn nature cherishes an injury until both mind and body are ruined."Kerrigan's Quality" is the title of a most interesting story by Jane Barlow, at young Irish authoress whose home is near Dublin. The emerald slopes, the rough sea and the quaint villages are all described as they could only be by one who has lived among them. While the pathetic, shrewd and humorous elements of her characters are presented with a realism true to life.Mrs. Kate Douglas Wiggin is a young widow who took up writing seriously after the death of her husband. She writes charming stories for young girls which are by some considered to surpass Miss Alcott's. Her "Polly Oliver" is a delightful story containing the most lovable of girl heroines.It is reported that Henry James is coming home to America to edit a magazine, and that Rudyard Kipling returns to England for the same purpose.In regard to the magazine which Mr. James is about to edit, it is possible that it will be too characteristic of its editor to appeal to a large class of readers. The later novels of Mr. James can be appreciated only by those whose reading is extensive and whose knowledge of the world is such that they can reflect on the underlying causes of events.An attractive little volume is that entitled "Aunt Lindy." Its author is Victoria Earle, the nom de plume assumed by Mrs. Wm. E. Matthews, the President of the Woman's Loyal Union of New York. The scene of the interesting little story is laid in the south, and the narrative is a pathetic illustration of 'Coals of fire.' The heroine is a typical woman of the negro race, well advanced in years, whose heart is warm, whose hand is skillful and whose life is devoted to the service of her Maker. The book contains four original illustrations by Mary L. Payne.Mr. S.R. Crockett, the author of an interesting story of adventure called "The Raiders," is a friend of Robert Louis Stevenson from whom he is said to have learned the art of successful storytelling. He is a Free Church minister and has a charge near Edinburgh. An editor once requested him to write an article on a minister's duties. He wrote it in the form of a story of one day and received a telegram asking for more. Since then he has continued to write. "A Stickit Minister" is his most successful book. The scene of "The Raiders" is laid in Galloway, and the time is the early part of the eighteenth century. It is charming for vigor, breadth, adventure, landscape and character.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 5. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.BUTLER R. WILSON,
ATTORNEY and COUNSELLOR AT LAW,
NOTARY PUBLIC,
34 School Street, (Room 33)
BOSTOND.A. NEWCOMB & SON,
DEALER IN
Fresh, Salt and Smoked Fish.
Fresh opened oysters and Clams.
194 Cambridge St., Boston, Mass.
Orders called for and delivered promptly.THE AMERICAN WRINGER CO.
13 & 15 BROADWAY EXTENSION. 
Boston, Mass.
Manufacturers of Clothes Wringers.
All kinds of Wringers and Sweepers repaired.
Orders by mail promptly attended to.LESSONS BY MAIL.
Instructions in English Composition,
Grammar, Use of Capitals, Punctuation,
Formation of Sentences, etc. Address,
Miss M.W. GOULD,
Box 165. Readville, Mass.PRIVATE BOARD.
MRS. ELIZABETH E. COOLEY will
accommodate a few select boarders for the
summer. Transient or permanent,
AT 62 PHILLIPS ST., BOSTON.For Every Kind of PRINTING 
Go to
Chas. Alexander,
Publisher of THE MONTHLY REVIEW,
30 Columbus Avenue, BOSTON.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 5. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ALTANTAATLANTA, GA.
REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D. D. President.
THIS Institution trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedom of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions from those who are willing to help towards their education. Write to the President.BOSTON TRAINING SCHOOL OF MUSICINCORPORATED
Vocal and Instrumental Music,
Harmony, Theory and Composition.
Pupils thoroughly Prepared for Teaching and Public Performance.
Central Location. CATALOGUE FREE.
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M., Director,
Music Hall Building, Boston, Mass.WHY YOU SHOULD SUBSCRIBE TO THE WOMAN'S ERA.Because it represents the best thought and work of the most advanced women of your race, and should therefore interest you.
Because it will keep you informed on matters you cannot afford to be ignorant of.
Because being a woman's movement, it is bound to succeed.
Because it is readable, it contains sixteen pages of solid matter, no plate matter, reprints, no filling up with headings and leads.
Because its subscription price is only one dollar a year.MUSICAL INSTRUCTION
JULY AND AUGUST.Summer School of Music
IN THE
Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute,
COTTAGE CITY. MASS.Four hundred to seven hundred students each season. Lessons in Piano, (practise Clavier Method), Singing, Harmony, Counterpoint and Musical Composition.Regular Course in Literature, Science and Art.A strong faculty of Eminent Teachers.ADDRESS,
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M,, Director of Boston Training School of Music.
20 Music Hall Building,
BOSTON, - MASS.BOSTON
Condensed Milk Co.'s
Plain condensed (unsweetened) Milk Is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. Sold in jars at the office, 2 1/2 Park Sq., Boston. Delivered three times per week.
ENDORSEMENT.
I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak, puny baby into a strong, plump one, after all other foods had failed.
MRS. MCGILL.
10 Lindall Place, Boston.F. S. BUTLER, Practical Tailor,
84 Mason St., Room 4, Boston. 
Ladies' and Gent's Clothing Cleansed Dyed, Repaired and Altered.MISS R. A. SMITH, Fashionable Dressmaker,
Orders promptly executed. All work guaranteed.
37 Anderson St., - Boston.Madame S. G. IRVEN'S FASHIONABLE
DRESSMAKING PARLORS,
KANSAS CITY, MO.
Colored Women's League, 1027 Charlotte St.MISS G. H. WILLIAMS,
BUSINESS ADVISER. 
Hours for Consultation,  4 P.M. to 9 P.M.
48 Charles St., Boston.
Trustworthy advice given on ALL subjects.HOUSEWIVES
Buy your Kerosene Oil and get the best water white oil off
C. H. YANCEY & BROTHERS, 
34 Kendall Street, Boston Mass.
Drop us a postal card, and we will call.
Because of the superior quality of this oil many members of the W. E. have pledged themselves to patronize these dealers.DR. R.B. CALLAWAY, DENTIST,
333 Tremont Street,  Boston.
OFFICE HOURS
9 A.M. to 1 P.M., and 1.30  to 6 P.M.Use Dr. Callaway's Saponaceous Tooth Powder. Price 25 Cents.M.D. JONES & CO.
REMOVED TO
368 WASHINGTON ST.,  BOSTON.
Cemetery Requisites
Decoration Day Supplies
Send for illustrated price listMCKENZIE & SMALLWOOD,
DEALERS IN
FINE : FOOTWEAR
OF ALL KINDS.
We also have with us Mr. PEGRAM, a first class shoemaker. Repairing neatly done. Also shoes made to order.
145 Cambridge St., Boston.THE
Great Historical Book
OF THE PRESENT TIME.
The Assassination of
LINCOLN,
By GEN. T. M. HARRIS.
A member of the Commission which tried the Assassins
Should be in every Household. 
PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED. 
Price in cloth, $2.50; hall Morocco, $3.50; full Morocco, $5.00.American Citizen Co.
7 Bromfeld St., Boston.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 5. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.DO YOU WANT
TO OWN YOUR OWN HOME?
THEN READ THIS!IF YOU WANT TO BUY A HOUSE IN CAMBRIDGE, SOMERVILLE, DORCHESTER OR EVERETT . . .
IT WILL PAY YOU TO CALL ONBALDWIN & DORSEY, Real Estate, Mortgage and Insurance Brokers,They make a specialty of property in the suburbs.
They furnish purchase money at low rates of interest.
They will lend you money to build a house on your own land.Stop! Pay no more Rent!  Begin now to buy your own home!BALDWIN & DORSEY, 
Real Estate, Mortgages and Insurance,
555 MAIN STREET,  CAMBRIDGEPORT.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
OF BOSTON Street Railway Builders and Contractors for Public Works.ESTIMATES MADE FOR A COMPLETE UNDERGROUND SYSTEM.GEO. S. BARNES. President.
STANLEY RUFFIN, Sec'y and Treas.
34 School Street, Boston.J.P. BOND & CO.
Gentlemen's Furnishing Goods,
Shirts, Cuffs and Collars.
Business and Dress Shirts, $1.00 and $ 1.50--Best Value. Cheviots, Percales,
and Fancy Shirts, 75c. to $2.00. 
Nice line of Hosiery and Underwear, Handkerchiefs, etc. Neckwear, 50c.
141 Dartmouth Street, - BOSTON.
DARTMOUTH LAUNDRY.The Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 6.BOSTON, MASS., Sept., 1894, PRICE 10 CENTS.THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the National Federation of Afro-American Women, and devoted to the Interests of the Women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country.Published monthly, in Boston, by JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, Editors and Publishers.SPECIAL CONTRIBUTORS.Medora W. Gould Leslie WilmotMarion Ridley Irene DeMortieM. Elizabeth Johnson.SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Club Rates, one hundred copies,   -    7.00Subscriptions Payable in Advance.WOMEN WORTH KNOWING.Edward Elmore BrockEDWARD ELMORE BROCK.No. 1.
Miss Blanche D. Washington.Miss Blanche D. Washington is another example of what the race is doing in the world's advancement. She is one of the plucky, patient and persistent workers in the world of music, and notwithstanding the many drawbacks that beset her early pathway, chief of which was ill health, still, standing today as model teacher her fame is second to none.Miss Washington resides at home with her mother, who is a successful business woman, being a celebrated manicurist. They are charmingly domiciled at 120 West and 26th Streets, New York, in handsome luxuriously furnished apartments which bear every appearance of refined and cultivated tastes.While Miss Washington would not be considered a beautiful women, still, she has an intense personal charm, which has been the means of drawing about her an immediate circle of friends. At the age of thirteen, she commenced the study of the piano under some of the most prominent professors of New York City, Her progress was so rapid that all who knew her prophesied for her a great future. At fifteen she began teaching some little friends of hers and from that time on her life has been passed chiefly in teaching music And in order to give her pupils the best possible instructions, she is continually studying up methods of teaching from the best masters. Last year she attended Scharwenka Conservatory of Music, entering the class for teachers. This year she is studying harmony and composition in the National Conservatory of Music. She is also the composer of several pieces of music, her most recent and successful being a military schottische entitled "Friendship's Greeting."Miss Washington claims that no true musician can expect to advance with the times without continual study. In addition to her regular teaching she has formed a class of all her pupils which meet for the inculcation of a thorough knowledge of the theory of music. That she also cherishes an ideal, is found in the fact that she is endeavoring to establish a Conservatory of Music, where for a nominal sum the best of instruction in all the branches can be obtained, for, as she says, while the White Conservatory offers till advantages and is open to all, the charges are beyond the means of the majority of colored-Americans. In this brief sketch it is impossible for the writer to say all that might be said in reference to the work of this charming woman, but still, I am glad of an opportunity to introduce, even through an inadequate description, one more of the clever women of the race to the many readers of the Woman's Era.The above is the first of a series of pen-portraits of "Women Worth Knowing," which will appear in this journalHelp in Choosing a School.The publishers of the WOMAN'S ERA will, on application of any of its subscribers, send catalogues and all information easily obtainable, concerning any academy, college, normal, music, or art school in New England, on receipt of stamped and directed envelope. Address,
WOMAN'S ERA, 103 Charles St.REMINISCENCES.Maria L. BaldwinMARIA L. BALDWIN.A Night Watch.One evening during the latter part of the Civil War the town of Bainbridge was filled with suppressed excitement. News had been brought from a neighboring city that the mob which a few days before had fallen upon New York, burning houses, killing helpless women and children--the mob that had left New York streets one mass of trampled human bodies--was coming to Bainbridge to continue its murderous work. Men gathered in groups on the street and talked in grave low tones then separated to make ready their guns and pistols. A neighbor came in to tell my mother the worst that was expected. For answer she gave him a look pitiable in its helplessness; then she stretched out her hand toward us children and looked about wildly as if for some way of escape.Nothing happened that night, and with returning day hearts grow stronger. But at evening the men came home again with faces full of foreboding and that night no man in the town slept. The twilight deepened, darkness settled down unrelieved by it single gleam of light from the houses. A dreadful stillness pervaded the streets, and in the window of each of these darkened homes sat a silent watcher.My mother tremblingly put together a few things in a bundle; I closely followed her. I think my child's heart recognized that her fright was as great as my own. Our house was surrounded by a low paling fence over which any school-boy might easily have vaulted, but the little gate of this fence my mother tied with yards of clothes line. Against the front door she pulled our heavy mahogany sofa. But, after all, how defenceless we were. Oh the happy children who were protected by a "big man with a gun."When everything was done, my mother laid us children, fully dressed, upon the bed and sat down beside it at the open window. I took fast hold of her dress and lay straining my eyes in the darkness to keep her outlines. I was in an agony of fear lest somehow I should lose her, and kept fastening my slipping fingers nearer to the gathers of her dress. I think I must have fallen asleep and then wakened--wakened to the awful darkness--wakened to find that I had lost her. I [scream]ed in terror. I felt her almost spring upon m[e to sil]ence me; then she gathered me close up t[o her an]d again took up her watch.Suddenly the stillness became full of a commotion that I felt, rather than saw or heard. My mother grasped the bundle beside her, dragged us both to our feet, then stood listening.From the direction in which the men had been watching came a sound like that of horses' feet. There was noiseless running and husky whispering in the streets. The clattering noise grew clearer. I was leaning from the window now beside my mother, and in a moment more we saw the twinkle of lights carried by men on horseback with tall plumes upon their heads. Then men came tearing through the streets, the frantic joy of their voices breaking the terrible silence. "The soldiers! The soldiers! They've come to protect us!"WOMEN AT HOME.Marie Louise Burgess MARIE LOUISE BURGESS.Typhoid Fever.Fever has a combination of symptoms, as inflammation of lungs, bowels, joints, etc. Patients in such instances become emaciated. Good knowledge off everof fever is necessary. One can tell by the temperature and pulse; flushing of face; dry skin and coated tongue; rise of temperature when it rises to a certain height and lasts a certain time. The temperature is taken in five minutes. The Hicks thermometer is the very best and all families should possess at least one. The pulse is caused by the systole and diastole, contraction and expansion of the heart; it may be felt at the radial and temporal arteries. The adult pulse is taken at the radial artery in the wrist and should average 72 beats in a minute; in a babe it is best taken at the temporal artery and averages from 100 to 120 beats in a minute. Motion, exercises, dancing, etc., cause quicker pulse, and also eating. It beats from 60 to 70 in men, 72 to 84 in women. In cases of fever a pulse of 120 and a temperature of 102 degrees are dangerous.The most important symptoms of typhoid fever are languor, headache and backache, nervousness, pain in the limbs, chills, feverish in the evening, temperature low in the morning, but rises to 103 or 104 at night; constipation, oftentimes diarrhea. Typhoid fever is supposed to come from some poisonous germ entering the bowels either through the water we drink  be caused by bad drainage, etc. Thlly lasts

twenty-one days, rising gradually morning and evening until it reaches its climax, then turns and gradually drops. During the time the patient is usually very ill, requiring the greatest care in nursing. Oftentimes he is delirious and very hard to manage. Milk diet should be given at regular intervals and no solid food until the doctor orders it. Oftentimes the patient has to be fed in small quantities, every hour or even half hour in a day that the proper amount of nourishment be taken in twenty-four hours. The bowels are in such a condition that if a piece of solid food were given before they are able to receive it, they would become punctured and death would be the result. The diet of a typhoid patient is his principal treatment while convalescing and a nurse has to be very careful.When the patient is first taken and has a chill, he should be put to bed in a large, airy, well ventilated room with not too many bed clothes, but warm and light. Eider-down puffs are objectionable. If the patient remains chilly, hot water bottles should be applied to feet and back and the skin may be rubbed with warm flannel cloths. A little hot water and brandy may be drunk.Generally heat follows chills, then sponge with cold or tepid water. Give plenty of water to drink and cracked ice. Compresses and ice bags may be applied externally. During the perspiring time wipe body with warm flannel ; after perspiring is done change bed cloths and the patients, if possible, move into another bed. During this do not let the patient sit up, as some part of the intestines is inflamed. Give milk, gruel and stimulants, nothing but liquids; only give as much milk as is easily digested, in very small quantities.Never waken unless sleep is too long and then raise the head gently and, administer the food. Give plenty of water, lemonade, barley water or toast water during the fever. Bed sores often come in acute diseases. Sponge baths ought to be given once or twice -daily during the fever. Symptoms of bed sores are redness, swelling and rawness. Sheets should be changed often and kept smooth, and the sacrum, hips, heels and elbows bathed with alcohol or brandy and water. Brandy and Bi-Chloride of Mercury 1-500, Oxide of Zinc powder used also. If skin is broken, air pillows should he used, zinc ointment or collodion and caster oil: When a black spot appears, wash with carbolic and apply poultices of flax-seed meal.A good nurse will never have a bed sore on her patient; it is considered the most disgraceful thing and reflects very badly upon the nursing. Always wash the patient's mouth before and after each feeding; a fever patient's mouth tastes badly from the condition of the stomach. Every dejection should be disinfected and immediately disposed of, for in typhoid fever the contagion is in the dejections. The temperature of the room should be 68 degrees and carefully watched.NEWS FROM THE CLUBS.Anna M. PooleThe Peabody State Normal Institute was held at the Hamilton Normal and Agricultural Institute from July 12th to Aug. 8th, 1894.HAMPTON, VA.One is truly thrilled with pride and admiration viewing the picturesque grounds of Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute from any contiguous point, and we, the teachers who are assembled here attending the State Peabody Summer Normal Institute, are highly favored and grateful for such a delightful place, breeze, baths, views, sails and practical instruction.Prof. Edwards of Richmond, as principal, is ably assisted by Miss F. S. Bruce of Washington, D. C., Messrs. George Stephens of Lynchburg, B. A. Graves of Richmond and John A. Williams of Hampton, Va.The instruction given by them from 9 A. M. to 1.30 P. M. in periods of thirty minutes shows thorough preparation in the different studies, and many of the methods are new and suited to this progressive age in which we live. The most fastidious would hardly fail to appreciate an object lesson given this morning of the river basin.A glance into the well equipped recitation rooms, where about 140 teachers are seated, zealous, energetic and attentive, demonstrates the interest in education, moral, intellectual and physical. You are not surprised to know that over a hundred of these are women.We are in debt to President Johnson for one of his most instructive and entertaining addresses, subject, "Practical Education." He is the proficient president of the Virginia Hard C. Institute, Petersburg.The women of Hampton are also playing an important part. They have a flourishing teachers' institute and are not behind in any good work for the upbuilding of our race and humanity. I am reminded substantially of their thoughtfulness, that our stay may not be all work and no play.

The beautiful and enjoyable sails will linger fresh in the minds of all. They were incentives to the morning hours of study.Receptions were given by prominent citizens at intervals, at which a brilliant company of invited guests assembled.At the Soldiers' Home, one of the most beautiful places to be found anywhere, we were tendered a picnic, on which occasion the committee spared no pains to amuse and entertain, and well did they succeed.The music was inspiring and "Forward " the word. Among the many present other than those in attendance at the Normal were Mr. and Mrs. Lewis Douglass, Miss Annie Simms of Washington, D.C., Mrs. Daggs, Mrs. Pinkett, Messrs. Joseph Waters, J. H. Robinson, F. D. Wheelock, Rev. Weeden and Capt. Washington.The regret was general that the hour arrived so soon to turn our faces homeward.A ball was given Aug. 3rd at the beautiful pavillionpavilion, Soldiers' Home, which occasion was one of great beauty and enjoyment.Great preparations are being made at the beautiful home of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Peake for the Green-Peake marriage. It will be the event of the season, so they who are in a position to know say.Mrs. Harris Barrette conducted a lawn party in the lovely grounds of her home on the 30th as she only knows how, and with much success. I have only one regret, and that is, I must return home tomorrow and leave these pleasures behind.ANNA M. POOLE.KANSAS CITY LETTER.Josephine Silone BatesEvery man, woman and child of the negro race should read, or learn to rend Frederick Douglass' article "Lessons of the Hour," in the July number of the A. M. E. Church Review. It should also be carefully read by any one who is not able to bring to any discussion of the southern lynching calm, unprejudiced and unbiassed thought. Logical, full of thoughtful lessons and carefully made statements which friend and foe would do well to make their own, the "Sage of Anacosta" makes here one of his noblest and clearest arguments.We hope that marked copies of this Review will be sent to Miss Willard, Mrs. Chant and others who apparently need a convincing argument upon a matter of vital importance to a large number of America's most loyal citizens.Among the questions recently propounded by Mrs. Matthews, one is as follows: "Believing that one great stumbling block as a race has been a deplorable lack of race pride, we are led to ask, what is the present outlook on this line?" We wish that this question might be figuratively and literally impressed upon the mind of each of our young people, and that they would so diligently seek for the answer that it also would come, whether in the "still small voice" or in the "rushing mighty wind," so clearly and definitely that no possible mistake could be made in its significance.A conversation recently took place between a party of white persons as to which race or nationality each one would prefer to be a member of. Having disposed of the Irish, Germans and Chinese, greatly to the disadvantage of these people, one remarked, "But I would be ashamed to be colored!" Ah, thought I, upon overhearing the remark, is not this the cause of much of our race trouble? Are we not, generally speaking, ashamed to be colored? Carrying this shamefacedness about with us in direct proportion to the amount of pigment distributed to us, instead of rising superior to the conditions which confront us and forcing the world by means of RESULTS ATTAINED to admit that "A man is a man for all that," we tacitly proclaim ourselves to be objects of pity and disgust, and receive exactly the wages we ask for--contempt and pity.At a meeting of the Kansas City League, July 30th, the work of Miss Ida Wells in England and this country was formally endorsed and the hope expressed that she might continue in the good work so well begun.August 13th Lawyer T.F. Sublette delivered a very noble address before the League upon the following subject: "The legal status of woman in the state of Missouri." Notwithstanding the heat, a good sized audience was in attendance, listened very attentively, and enthusiastically urged the necessity of a course of lectures upon kindred subjects during the coming fall and winter.Mrs. Lucinda Day, one of the most enterprising members of the community, has opened a grocery store. We wish that more of our numbers would engage in some of the various lines of business.During the last month the League has been called upon quite frequently to do missionary and charitable work, and in each case haas responded cheerfully to the full extent of its ability.

In this way, two families, one young woman and one child have, during this time, received considerable aid in the struggle for existence.Yours for the race,JOSEPHINE SILONE BATES.Myrtle HarrisThe members of Western Queen Court, No. 5, realized quite it handsome sum from their recent entertainment. This organization is composed of some of the most reliable ladies of the city and does homage to its title.MYRTLE HARRIS, Sec.WOMAN'S ERA, BOSTON.The vacation months, July and August, have found nearly all of the clubs resting from active work as clubs, while yet individual members have gone on planning and preparing for the next season's work.The Woman's Era Club followed the vacation fashion and consequently has no achievements to recount this month. The president of the W.E.C. conceived the idea of using her vacation in visiting other clubs, and prominent club women in their summer houses or wherever they might be found, started out simply with the expectation of coming home filled with ideas and enthusiasm for the inspiration of her own club family. But physical infirmity sometimes gets the better of even the strongest will, and so it happened that days that were expected to be spent in congenial work were, instead, spent on an invalid's couch.WOMAN'S LOYAL UNION, N.Y.In spite of the drawbacks of a wholly tired and half sick condition, on the urgent invitation of the president of the Women's Loyal Union of New York and Brooklyn to come over and help her and at the same time present the claims of the club paper, a visit was made by the Era's president which cannot fail of being fruitful of good results all round. Of course at this season only a very small part of the membership the W. L. L. were in town, but enough intelligent enthusiasm remained with that small fraction to project and carry on a large meeting of both sexes at Dr. Derrick's old church on Sunday evening, August 12th, at which both club presidents spoke, preceded and followed in glowing oratory, by the present pastor and Dr. Derrick. Many complimentary and encouraging words were said of women and their present activity, and Mrs. Matthews' plan of forming chapters of the W. L. L. in all the large churches of New York and Brooklyn was unfolded and heartily approved. After August, these Sunday evening meetings will be continued and the plan more definitely detailed. If Mrs. Matthews' plan is carried out as she outlines it, New York will be the home of a powerful organization for good works, and the class of women Mrs. Matthews has gathered around her as helpers assures the stability and efficiency of the work. In the metropolis, as might be expected, there are a large number of women of means and a larger number of women with brains, who give the support of their intelligent sympathy and money to work laid out for them by their energetic leader, and in the hands of such well known and capable ladies its Mrs. H. H. Garnet, Mrs. Attwel, Miss Imogen Howard, Mrs. Carman, Mrs. Phillip White, Dr. S. S. McKinney and a long list of others equally as active but too numerous to mention, the cause of educating women up to the 20th century demands on them, is safe and sure in New York.WOMAN'S ERA SCHOLARSHIP IN MUSIC.Miss Annie Fisher, the New Bedford young lady who is working hard for the first premium offered by the WOMAN'S ERA,-- a year's tuition at the Boston Training School of Music,--is said to be the possessor of a phenomenal voice, and for years she has sought an opportunity to cultivate it. But this young girl's life has been an unusually sad and pathetic one. Being early left an orphan and the sole support of a crippled grandfather, she saw no way to carry out the cherished desire of her heart, cultivate her voice, until her attention was called to the offer made in the, ERA. Now, through the kind sympathy of friends who know her talent and worthiness and the liberality of the publishers of the ERA, a way has been opened for Miss Fisher to acquire a profession by which it is hoped she may he enabled to more easily carry the burdens heaped upon her young shoulders. A few more subscribers secured and the scholarship is hers. A liberal percentage will also he allowed her for expenses in coming to Boston and returning to her charge in New Bedford, and, with the supervision the publishers of this paper have pledged themselves to have over her while studying in Boston, they feel that they are carrying out their settled policy of helping women to help themselves. The third premium, offered to children obtaining 25 subscribers, is still open, and through it an unusual opportunity is given to parents to immediately place their little beginners in music under the careful training of first-class teachers. The Boston Training School of Music is one of the best in New England, and a year's tuition in such a school for only a little energetic canvassing on the part of a child, is a lasting benefit received for comparatively nothing. When this offer is withdrawn such an opportunity is not likely to be offered again.See Premium Offers.The Ladies' Physiological Society of Boston and Vicinity.Is the oldest incorporated association of women in this country, having been incorporated by act of the legislature in 1850. The association was formed two years previous, and the first season of lectures was given in the winter of 1847-8, by Prof. Bronson, by whose efforts the movement was first started and who generously helped the cause by services and apparatus.The object of the Institute is, as given in its charter, to "promote among women a knowledge of the human system, of the laws of life and health, and of the means of preventing and relieving sickness and suffering."Every year since its organization it has maintained a course of lectures extending from October to June, on physiology, hygiene, sanitary nursing, emergencies, and other subjects relating to the highest development of the human being.The season of 1894-5 will open with a course of lectures on "Reproduction," by its President, Salome Merritt, M.D. The first lecture will be given in Wesleyan Hall, 36 Bromfield St., Thursday, Oct. 4, at 3 P.M., and is free to all.Stamp Saving Societies.Although it comparatively recent idea, stamp saving has become so popular that there are now few large cities in the United States which have not a Stamp Saving Society. The benefits of such societies are so large, and the trouble and expense so comparatively slight, it is not strange that they have multiplied so rapidly. Such societies can easily be started in tiny school or community.The object is to encourage small savings, either by children or adults. No sum is too small to be received. It is expected that the deposits will be mainly of pennies, and when a deposit reaches the sum of five dollars the depositor is expected to transfer it to a savings bank.The plan is very simple. In exchange for one cent, three cents, or any like sum, the depositor receives a stamp of the denomination of the sum deposited. This stamp is pasted in a book bearing depositor's name and address, When the book is full of stamps, a new one is received and also an account book. At any time books can be redeemed simply by presentation.The outfit for a society costs but little. The book-keeping is almost nothing, as each book keeps itself. In large cities, there is usually a central station where books are issued and stamps sold in bulk; besides which there are branch stations where money is received and stamps sold by retail.By such an institution it is an easy matter to teach children to save. Poor children spend many more pennies than rich and get into habits which are ruinous to thrift. Some one tells a story about a family set out of doors for nonpayment of rent, and while their poor old rickety furniture blocked the streets, their children were constantly running to and fro spending pennies for all kinds of foolishness. For every stamp deposited a child receives something tangible--a bright pretty stamp, and pastes it into his own book. Then, too, he becomes ambitious to fill up his book and denies himself to do it. Besides encouraging the saving habit, it is a great material help, many children being often enabled to get a new dress or pair of shoes with money that would otherwise have been worse than wasted.The Committee of Council and Co-operation is a delegate committee consisting of not more than three members from any association, whose "object is to promote a spirit of unity and helpfulness among the associating societies, and to facilitate active co-operation in measures and departments of work of common interest."Their method is to work quietly to effect their object and only to report to the public results accomplished.There are now thirteen societies represented in the committee: Young Woman's Christian Association, Woman's Charity Club, Woman's Christian Temperance Union, Physiological Institute, Moral Education Association, Moral Reform Association, Woman's Press Association, Ladies' Aid of the Soldiers' Home, Helping Hand Society, Mass. School Suffrage Association, and the Federation of Clubs.By an appeal to the West End Street Railway management it has effected much in the way of cleanliness of the cars and the keeping of the platform and handrails free for the ingress or egress of passengers. It was active in securing a Board of Visitors to the Public Institutions, and it has opposed demoralizing exhibition on the stage, especially in the cheap places of amusements.(Continued next month.)The Monthly Review.With the August number the Monthly Review completes its first volume, and it is the best and cleanest as to presswork and composition of arty number yet issued. The most notable contributors to this number are T. Thomas Fortune, and Alice Ruth Moore, a young Southern lady of versatile literary talent. Miss Moore's contribution is a poem of much merit. If the courageous enterprise shown by Mr. Alexander in the starting of a magazine of the class to which the Review belongs fails for lack of sufficient financial support, he will still have made many his debtors for introducing to New England readers, through its columns, Miss Alice Ruth Moore. This promising young writer's prose articles, short stories and sketches, are of such fine literary workmanship as to give reason for belief that a gem has been unearthed capable of the highest polish.Francis E. W. Harper spoke to the National League at its last weekly gathering. It must have been Mrs. Harper's humble and frequent allusion to herself as an old woman that led the Globe reporter to publish her as eighty years old, when, in fact, she has the appearance and is twelve or fifteen years younger. Women who, like Mrs. Harper, have spent their time in cultivating their heads and hearts for unselfish usefulness, are not old at sixty-seven. Fortunate for us is it that Mrs. Harper is still in the prime of her intellectual vigor, and her finished oratory is as persuasive as ever.The Twentieth Century, a weekly radical magazine published by the Humboldt Publishing Company, 19 Astor Place, New York, is the most thoughtful political journal that reaches our desk. If you are not afraid of new ideas and political progress write to the publishers for a sample copy. The Twentieth Century is, as its name indicates, ahead of the times, and not alone points out the evils of existing conditions, but the remedies to be applied for their removal and the elevation of the human race.EDGAR P. BENJAMIN,
Attorney and Counsellor-at-Law
Room 22,
34 SCHOOL STREET, BOSTON.FREE!Splendid Premium Offers.By special arrangement with the Boston Training School of Music, the Woman's Era is enabled to offer the following splendid premiums which offer we venture to say is unprecedented.FIRST PREMIUM.READ. To the one who obtains the largest number of subscribers, over one hundred, within the next six mouths we will give one year's tuition either in voice, violin, piano or harmony and counterpoint at the above-named school.SECOND PREMIUM.For the second highest number of subscribers in the next six months we will offer a term at the Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute for the summer of '94 with Instructions either in music, art, literature, elocution, oratory or shorthand and type-writing.THIRD PREMIUM.For the three children over nine years of age, first obtaining fifty subscribers for us, a years instruction on piano. This is for beginners.FOURTH PREMIUM.To all contestants failing to gain the premiums we will give a commission of twenty-five per cent.The Boston Training School of Music makes a specialty of the training of teachers of music, it is a school of the highest grade and for these reasons and because this school has made no distinction on account of race, the management of this paper has selected it for its premium offer. The number of young people who come to Boston for a musical education increases yearly; through these premiums it is hoped to give a helping hand to worthy aspirants.A course in piano, voice, violin, theory or harmony and counter point at the finest school of its kind in the country.For further particulars address the Woman's Era, St. Augustine's Trade Schools, North Grove Street, Boston, Mass.GEORGE L. RUFFIN,
LESSONS IN SINGING.
Lamperti Method.
AFTER OCTOBER 1st,
103 Charles Street.ADVERTISE IN THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTEREST OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.The WOMAN'S ERA, as the organ of the colored women's clubs, has a large circulation in many of the large cities, notably Boston, New Bedford, Providence, New York, Chicago, Washington and Kansas City.The Literary, Musical, and Domestic Departments are under the control of competent writers and critics.With its large circulation among women, and particularly among women of the refined and educated classes, it offers peculiar advantages to advertisers of household articles, wearing apparel, books, magazines, musical instruments, and so forth.Its rates are exceedingly liberal.Try it, and you will not regret it.EDITORIAL.Woman's Place.It does seem sometimes that the best weapon to use against those who are so alarmed at the thought of woman losing her womanliness and sphere in the near future, is absolute silence; so few of the arguments of these people are worth answering and in so many cases does it seem beneath one's dignity to answer.The Virginia Baptist recently published a series of two elaborate articles which claim to prove through Bible authority that the only place for woman in the church is that of a singer and prayer, and that in teaching and preaching she (woman) is acting contrary to divine authority and that the exercise of the right of suffrage would be it deplorable climax to these transgressions.The writer of this article is evidently in earnest but sadly in need of enlightenment, and although it is almost useless to hope that he can be reached by any kind of argument, yet it might not be amiss to ask him a few questions and to present to his consideration a few suggestions.In the first place why do such people as he hold strictly to Bible text in one case and when it suits them, and not in another when does not suit them?We seldom hear of them following literally the injunction "Take no thought of what ye shall eat, etc., and wherewithal ye shall be clothed.." In fact it is the brethren who are most anxious about their meat and drink and who see in women, possibly rivals, who are most concerned about woman's place in the church, and that it shall not be such as shall rob them of any honor or profit. Such men tell us that common sense must be used in the interpretation of the Scriptures in a passage like the above. They acknowledge that changed conditions of living necessitate a liberal translation, and yet are so narrow as not to see that while the women of the year A. D. 32 were probably not prepared by training or opportunity to either teach or preach, that it is no argument that the woman of A. D. 1900, after years of culture and study may not be able to interpret the Scriptures as lucidly as "Guardian" at least; because Paul told woman what, with their limited opportunities they might do, it is an insult to his and their intelligence to conclude that they must not develop and use future opportunities. It is according to law, gospel, history and common sense that woman's place is where she is needed and where she fits in and to say that the place will affect her womanliness is bosh; womanliness is an attribute not a condition, it is not supplied or withdrawn by surroundings, it may be lacking in the most feeble and protected woman, and strong in her who is the sole support of her little ones and has to fight the flesh, the devil and the world too, in their behalf. It is spurious womanliness that only manifests itself in certain surroundings.The Illustrated American has been publishing a series of prize papers for and against Woman Suffrage. As an argument for suffrage it is the best thing that has been devised lately.  The weak effusive arguments against suffrage can have but one effect on the indifferent, and that is to turn them into suffragists so that by no mistake they may be counted among these remonstrants. The thing that strikes the readers more than anything else is the constantly repeated argument and fear that through suffrage woman will lose her womanliness, this is the strength of the opposition and it means only one of two things, either the opposition is weak or it is blind, in either case it merits little attention.It is as impossible for woman to turn back as for time--they are bound to march on. Only let them be patient and calm--not unduly excited and aggressive over these small attacks; let them treat them as the strong womanly woman treat all pin pricks.Mr. Fortunes Question.In discussing his own question, "Are we brave men or cowards?" T. Thomas Fortune in the August Monthly Review makes a severe arraignment of both the white and black races in this country, from the point of view of one who has hoped much from both and been disappointed. He puts his case strongly, and supports it with undeniable facts, facts so, self-evident as to call for no emphasis here, except to draw attention to some phases of the question--the responsibility or the negro himself for allowing a continuance of existing conditions because of his inability to organize for the general welfare, because of his utter lack of veneration for, and support of worthy and capable leaders, and the dwarfing effect of vast charity bestowed and willingly accepted by him. These are some of the causes, Mr. Fortune claims that are having the effect of keeping the race in its own, and the estimation of others, but "As children of larger growth." Of course the usual number will rise up to berate the asker of the question and make the usual charge of traducing and discouraging the race, because like a true healer Mr. Fortune seeks first to locate the cause of the trouble; if in doing so the sensitive wound is hurt, all the more evident is it that an unhealthy condition exists; true progress is not possible until a healthy, manly condition is obtained. Time was when the exigences of the case compelled the largest allowance of charity for the short-comings of a race just graduated into manhood, but after a quarter century or opportunity, though limited, failure to strengthen the belittling weaknesses which so hinder and retract us in the fight for existence, is inexcusable and in the present critical condition of things, fatal. Timid men and ignorant men should stand aside, they and the mendicant who stands always with outsretchedoutstretched hand for alms possess not the spirit for leadership. All too long has the way been blocked by bold incompetents who misrepresent, by burlesquing the colored people of the country. The time is come when they must stand aside for others more capable and more independent. Now also the whole race should realize the importance of doing its share of giving, as well as taking in more ways than one.Negro Folk-Lore.One of the interesting institutions at Hampton is the society for the study of Negro Folk-Lore and Ethnology. A few years ago a similar society was formed in Boston among the colored people, which was the first of its kind in the country. Although there were a few enthusiasts the society died from lack or interest.There have been and are two strong sides as to the value of such work. There are those who believe firmly that the sooner the colored man loses and forgets his characteristics, the better it be for himself and other Americans. In a lecture delivered in Boston some time ago, George W. Cable advised the colored people to make all haste to drop those marks distinctly negroid, to strive to write like a white man, dress, act, and talk like one, and so hasten on the day when they will be distinguished only as "Americans." Others believe just as firmly that the best good of the race is served by preserving all characteristics that are worth preserving; that we have attributes, of mind and characteristics of expression that might rather be copied by the other race rather than dropped by us. At any rate, it can but help to dignify the race to preserve its anecdotes and songs, the work that is being done by the Folk-Lore Society.Father Grimes and Father Field.Over forty years have passed since Lenard A. Grimes, of revered memory, came to Boston with his wife and four little children. He had just been released from a second imprisonment in a southern jail for persistently aiding and abetting slaves to escape from bondage. He was converted to Christianity in prison, and on reaching Boston immediately threw himself with ardor into evangelistic work. A ripe field he found for his zeal at the West End of the city, and having attracted to himself some of the best people of Boston and vicinity, he founded a church, and by almost superhuman effort, built and paid for an edifice for his people to worship in. He ably planned, and lived to help execute the plans for the most beneficent of all charities, the "Home for Aged and Infirm Colored Women" an institution conceived, started and carried off for a while by him, with but little aid or encouragement from any source. He died in the fulness of the activities of a loving minister to people of all creeds, colors and condition. His title of "Father" grew out of the paternal, loving interest he showed in the affairs of his parishioners, and he was commonly called so by all citizens. For long years after the death of Father Grimes his place remained vacant.
 
Although many were tried, none were found able to take up the work where the Rev. Mr. Grimes left it twenty years ago until the Rev. Father Field stepped in, and today in his successful work for the closing up of the liquor saloons, in cleaning up the homes of the poor of the neighborhood, in his trade schools and in his latest and most significant achievement, the securing of a branch of the public library for the West End with all that that implies, he is unconsciously, perhaps, making realities of some of Father Grimes most cherished dreams.The "Wonderful" Sam Jones.That disgusting mountebank, Sam Jones, the evangelist, should find no place among real Christians. With his foul and irreverent talk, he does nothing but harm to the cause he pretends to be called to represent. His talk generally, and his latest harangue at Round Lake Camp meeting grounds particularly, should convince colored people that no message of grace will be sent to them through such an instrument.LITERATURE DEPARTMENT.Medora M. GouldMEDORA M. GOULD.In the August Cosmopolitan is a sketch of a Home Culture Club that was started by an enterprising woman in a most unneighborly neighborhood. It explains in the form of a sroty the need of clubs for women and the good they accomplish. A great many women who are outside of the club movement are of the opinion that they are only for the highly educated, or are composed of strong minded women who, oblivious of home duties, spend their time discussing woman suffrage and social reform in the loudest of voices. To such as are of that opinion, this "Story of a Club" can but be a revelation. Even if a club as a body does not do anything for the outside world in the way of charity that will reflect credit on itself, it will accomplish untold good by raising its members individually from the ruts of their daily lives, and giving them an insight into the lives and purposes of others. But work a club must have of some sort, as an excuse for being."A Superfluous Woman" adds one more to the sensational books that have been so widely read of late. We might well ask, "Whither are we tending?" when so many ennobling, edifying and interesting books are allowed to remain on the library shelves uncalled for and unread. It is we women who are responsible for the present trend in literature, for it is the women who do the novel reading. Is there not something wrong in our education when we prefer the sensational and dramatic phases of life to life as it really is, as is found in history? Mr. Howells says that the American girl is not educated; that she reads nothing but novels, and those according to fashion and not on their merits. Mr. Howells has spent much of his time in Italy and is enthusiastic in regard to the attainments of the Italian girl. The educated girl of Italy speaks several languages fluently and well, and is conversant with the customs, history and literature of other countries besides her own.When the summer with all its frivolous pursuits is of the past, and we settle down to improve the shining hours of the long winter evenings and our minds at the same time, we can ponder "Man's Place in Nature" with Thomas Huxley, or over "The Ascent of Man" with Prof. Drummond."A Friend of the Queen," by Paul Gaulot, and which has been translated into English by Mrs. Cashel Hoey, is a work that throws much light on the French Revolution and the events immediately preceding it. It begins with an account of France during the latter part of the reign of Louis XV, and gives a complete history of Marie Antoinette, presenting her character without partiality and her various experiences with historical accuracy.Agnes Repplier, whose monthly letters add so much to the attractiveness of the Cosmopolitan, has written a book of essays which display great originality of thought, and places her in the front rank as it writer. She has a deep and varied knowledge of literature, and uses quotations and gems of verse with a facility that adds much to her fine and polished style.The August Cosmopolitan concludes the charming Spanish story, "The Origin of Thought," begun in the February number. This is a story of real people whose ordinary doings are told in a most interesting manner. The illustrations are particularly fine.Mrs. E.D.E.N. Southworth, who has written volumes and volumes of entertaining fiction, is still living. Between thirty and forty years ago her books were eagerly read, but they are now no

longer in demand. She was the originator of the continued story in this country. Her first one was called "Retribution," and was published in a Washington newspaper. She preserves with great care a letter which she received from the poet Whittier, in which he says that "Retribution" is the finest piece of fiction he ever read.The book upon which Ex-Congressman John M. Langston has been at work for several years is soon to be published.Those who have read Sarah Grand's "Heavenly Twins," and, aside from the high purpose of the story, found it uninteresting, will find the author at her best in "Our Manifold Natures," a collection of short stories which were written previous to the production of her long story.W. Clark Russell, who writes such thrilling tales of the sea, has given to his readers another romance aboard ship. It is called "The Emigrant Ship."J. Stanley Weyman's novel, "Under the Red Robe," treats of FranceatFrance at the time of Cardinal Richlieu, when life was all romance, and honor, love and murder seemed to reign pre-eminent. It is a spirited tale of adventure and just escapes sensationalism by the noble qualities of its women characters.Rudyard Kipling has written a book called The Jungle Book," in which the animals hold conversations and appear good or bad according to their various characteristics, as in the days of Aesop. It will take its place as it favorite with children.Amelie Rives Chanler, whose name was on everybody's tongue when "The Quick or the Dead" was first produced, is now among the dead, so far as literary fame is concerned. She has become a settled matron, her figure having lost all its girlish grace. And her once blonde hair has returned to its original brown.SOCIAL NOTES.BOSTON.A party of twelve, the guests of Mr. and Mrs. Goodell, enjoyed a trip down the harbor in a sailboat on Wednesday, August 8, stopping at Downer Landing and various points of interest.During the latter part of August the Newport season was at its gayest. Among the Boston people there were Dr. and Mrs. Grant and Miss Mabel Grant, Mr. and Mrs. Butler R. Wilson, Mr. and Mrs. N. F. Ridley and daughter, Mrs. Joseph Lee, Mrs. and Miss De Mortie, W. H. Lewis, R. A. Lewis, Miss Hernie Garvin, Mr. Lyde W. Benjamin.Saratoga also has had a fair sprinkling of Boston visitors in August. Misses Florence and Hattie Smith, Miss Louise Louis, Mrs. P. A. Glover, Miss Georgine Glover and Mr. Edward Glover, Mrs. Nellie Brown Mitchell and her sister, Miss Edna Brown and Mr. Parker M. Bailey.Mrs. Charles Boyde of Brooklyn has been seriously ill at her former home in Newport.Mrs. Alfred Lewis and her daughter, Miss Lilian A. Lewis are at Brandy Station, Va., for a fortnight.Mr. Wyatt Archer spent a few days in Boston about the middle of August, en route for Newport.On invitation, Mr. George Ruffin and Mr. Samuel Jamieson gave a recital of classical music, vocal and instrumental, at the Stockbridge Casino.Mrs. Arianna Sparrow and her guest, Miss Louise Parin of Wilmington, have just returned from a most enjoyable trip to St. John, N. B.Mrs. Comer of Lynn spent August at Bar Harbor.Miss Nita Turner, who came to Boston this Summer for a course in physical culture, has returned to her home in Washington.Miss Alfrata Chapman is at Lenox, Mass, the guest of Mrs. Daniel Osberhont.Miss Dora Cole of Philadelphia is at the Lucas Cottage, Saratoga.The N. E. Women's Press Association gave a farewell breakfast to Miss Belle Grant Armstrong of the Boston Globe as an expression of good will and regret at her departure for New York, where she goes to take up a permanent residence. The breakfast took place at the Parker House on Thursday, Aug. 30, at noon.NEW YORK.The town is not only deserted, but looks deserted, the majority of our people being about equally divided between Saratoga and Asbury Park. Until this year, Atlantic City and Newport have to all appearances been the magnet, attracting searchers for health and seekers after pleasure.

This year Asbury Park takes the lead with Saratoga a close second.The centre of attraction at Asbury Park from our city is, of course, Miss Katie White. She and her tall distinguished looking fiancee attract no little interest while walking, boating and driving; the young man, by the way, is not only on the road to an enviable financial position, but is one of the most popular young men in Brooklyn. A great many people liken him to Hon. Chauncy M. Depew. I believe in features they are somewhat alike, noticeably so. They differ politically. Mr. Lansing, well every one knows 'tis Mr. Lansing, is a follower of the child of lucky destiny Grover C. I have seen Depew, and when be looks at you makes you think he's not acquainted with anyone else in the world but you; while Mr. Lansing impresses one with the thought that for some cause or other he desires to laugh, and out of politeness is striving to suppress it. I know one fair damsel that looked away up into his face with the most innocent expression imaginable and said coyly, "Do laugh real hearty, I don't mind." Well, he did laugh. After 'twas over he looked just the same as before. Strange, but of course when one thinks a little he can't be blamed for looking so irritatingly delighted with himself and the world. We congratulate him; why should not he congratulate himself?Mrs. White still tarries at the Park. Mrs. T.B. Francis has departed from its fascinations and joined the brilliant company in Saratoga.Gotham misses the one personality that in some indefinable way arouses a lively picture of South American beauties and belles--Mrs. J. Pegram Williams--there's no one here that possesses more "chic" than this same lady. Her millinery is positively sentimental creations, thrown in splendid relief by her beautiful black eyes and midnight tresses. Speaking of her, one instinctively thinks of her sweet little chum whom a tall, Saratogian will lead to Hymen's altar in the near future. It is positively distresing to think of the many bright girls who will in the fall add to the already over-crowded ranks of fascinating matrons.Miss V. Adele Montgomery, Gotham's charming pianist, will journey to Saratoga to spend the closing days of this season.One of our most charming widows, it is said, will this fall journey to France, Paris. I know somebody wishes it were Hayti, but then, that brings the thought of another widow, a magnificent one, too, from every point of view; perhaps No. 1 had better go to France.There have been meetings and meetings. It is amazing to sit and listen to the woman talk. I understand that perfect type of a Colonial Dame, Mrs. J. St. P. Ruffin, visited our city in the interest of the ERA, and addressed a large meeting at Bethel church in conjunction with the Woman's Loyal Union of New York and Brooklyn. Somebody was selfish, because very little was seen of this cultured woman suffragist, though I did see a party conducting her from Macy's Lunch Room.Mrs. Frances E. W. Harper passed through our city en route for New London, Conn.There is, I am sorry to say, a real anarchist of African descent in our midst--of course this is a rumor, but based on pretty solid fact--a past college professor, well versed in chemistry and an able linguist. He was one of the most prominent at an anarchistic demonstration a short while ago. As his ancestry has left so light a trace of its individualizing touch on complexion, feature or manner, strange things and revelations may be in store for those who are so sure that the colored man is the symbol of prayer and peace. The gentleman in question is about to make an extensive tour through the south, after which be rests in--Illinois.ANNO DOMINO, 1894.A musical reception was Given by Mr. Sydney Woodward to Dr. and Mrs. Butler of Atlanta, Ga., on Monday evening, Aug. 20th. A goodly number of Mr. Woodward's friends gathered to do honor to his guests, and during, the course of the evening were treated to some fine vocal and instrumental music, rendered by Mrs. Mitchell, Mr. Glover and the host. An abundant collation also contributed toward making the affair the pleasing success it was.The many eastern friends of Mrs. Mollie (Lewis) Keelan will be interested in the following news sent from the new home of the Keelans: "A thoroughbred girl showed up here Sunday to match the thoroughbred boy. Very little excitement attended and all are doing splendidly--including the father. Wyoming, Ohio, 8-20-'94."Miss Georgiana Putnam has proved a sympathetic member of the Willing Workers' Circle of King's Daughters, whose special work is directed toward maintaining the Colored Home of Brooklyn. She is tireless in her efforts in its behalf.Miss Edie Braxton is visiting at Cape May, the guest of Miss Stevens of Philadelphia.Mrs. Theo. Fischer and her sister, Mrs. Braxton, have joined the New York Colony at Saratoga.Mrs. William C. Green is sojourning in Peekskill on the Hudson.Mrs. F. H. Carmand and son, accompanied by Mrs. W. E. Matthews, and son, are visiting at the National Capital.Rev. Hutchins C. Bishop is away on his vacation, at Sea Isles, it is said.Mrs. Harry Kemp left town for Asbury Park some days ago.Miss S. E. Frazier has gone on her vacation to Harrison's, rumor has it, to gain strength and courage for a Possible conflict with the New York Board of Education.Counsellor T. J. Minton of Philadelphia surprised some or his old friends by a hasty call a few days ago. He has been the guest of Prof. and Mrs. Dorsey.Mr. E. M. Allen, who is troubled somewhat with that aristocratic disease, the gout, has gone to Saratoga to try the baths, drink the waters and admire the pretty girls at that bachelors' paradise.PROVIDENCE.Providence, also, showed its attitude and interest in the work done by Miss Wells in England by a large and enthusiastic endorsement meeting at the A.M.E. Church, Winter street, on Aug. 16th. A committee of five was appointed to engage Miss Wells to speak in that city sometime  in the near future.Rev. William H. Jenkins has received and accepted a call to become the pastor of the Pond Street Baptist Church.Mr. G. F. Richings delivered his famous stere-optican lecture at Bethel Church on the 20th of August.0The many friends of Miss Clementine Laing will learn with regret that after long months of suffering no improvement in her health is apparent.Mr. William A. White of Brooklyn is spending his vacation with his sisters on Thayer street.Miss Etta Tolliver has returned from her vacation visit at Narragansett Pier and will shortly go on to Boston for the winter. She is one of the most active of the members of the Woman's Era Club of Boston.NEWPORT.It is doubtful if a merrier party could be found this summer than that assembled in Mary street, Newport. A dozen congenial spirits made the summer a memorable one. Bathing, driving and fishing made the days go quickly, while music and feasting were the order indoors. The jolly crowd was photographed over and over again in many different attitudes and places by Dr. Grant, who is an enthusiastic amateur. So deep were the regrets at parting that a half way agreement was made to come together again at Coddington Point, a picturesque and charming spot just out of Newport.Among those who came to Newport the latter part of August were Mrs. Prince Saunders of Hartford, who was accompanied by one of her sons. Mrs. Mintess of Philadelphia, Miss Cora Cromwell of Chelsea, Mr. and Mrs. John Downing of New York, Miss Bessie Baker of Cambridge, Messrs. W. H. Lewis, Samuel Jamieson, Wyatt Archer, Lincoln Smith, John Hope and T. A. Ridley.Mrs. Silas Dickerson gave a handsome luncheon on the 23rd of August. Those invited were Mr. and Mrs. B. R. Wilson, Dr. and Mrs. Grant and Miss Grant, Mr. and Mrs. Smith and the Misses Smith, Mr. and Mrs. N. A. Ridley, Miss Rice, Messrs. Lewis, Archer and Smith.Mr. W. E. B. De Bois, lately returned from Germany, has accepted a professorship at Wilberforce.NEW BEDFORD.Mrs. Belle Mitchel and daughter, Miss Bessie, Mrs. Mar Sulis, Mrs. Parthenia Carter and Edwin D. Douglass and family are some the of the New Bedford people who went down to the British Provinces to be present at the silver wedding anniversary of Mr. and Mrs. Richardson of St. John.The many admirers of the talent and pluck of Miss Annie Fisher in this city are rallying to aid her in her efforts to secure the vocal scholarship offered by the WOMAN'S ERA. They gladly take this means to show their interest in this hard working young girl, and also their appreciation of the generosity of the ERA, shown in the very favorable arrangements made by them by

which it is possible for Miss Fisher to get the full benefit of the offer made. Long live one only woman's paper!Young Dr. Carter has safely launched his boat on the professional sea.THE SLAVERY CASE IN BOSTON.Some little while ago the people of Boston were startled by the newspaper accounts of the case of a colored girl held in virtual slavery in Boston. The story was a most startling one and aroused the interest and attention of everybody. The Woman's Era Club through its president at once began an investigation in which it was very much aided by Sawyer Plummer of this city.The girl when interviewed at the home of Dr. Crocker presented a very interesting personality; about sixteen years of age. She was exceedingly well-grown with the very noble features which often accompany a dark skin; she appeared modest and reticent and suffering at the time with an aggravated case of heart disease, she excited the interest and sympathy of all her visitors; her story was most startling.She claimed to have been born in Beaufort, S. C., and lived there with her parents until ten or twelve years of age. At that time a northern lady, Mrs. Hanson, who was visiting the south with an invalid friend, saw her and attracted by her had persuaded her mother to let her take the child north; Mrs. Hanson drew such an attractive picture of the life the child would lead, of the advantages she would have that the mother sent the girl willingly. After reaching Boston, according to Mary's story, they were driven to a street in South Boston, and entered it house which Mary never left for four years. In telling the tale of her life in this prison Mary went into the minutest detail. She was confined to a back-kitchen and wood shed during the day and an attic at night.. She was obliged to rise before daylight, was only allowed a fire in the kitchen stove while cooking, was fed on the scraps front the table and went bare foot all the time; she was never allowed in the front of the house and the window in the wood shed was barred and locked.The story of her escape was in keeping with the rest. A colored woman who worked for a married daughter of the family heard of her, managed to see her and to give her a quarter of dollar and an address and advised her to escape. One summer night Mary secreted the key of the wood shed, and after the family went to bed unlocked the door and escaped. It was very near midnight, however, before she had succeeded in getting free; she was then barefooted and dressed in a ragged gown which only reached her knees. She had not left the house long before a terrible thunder storm arose and she sought refuge in the car house where she waited for the early morning car to Boston. She succeeded in finding the people whose address had been given to her, was put to bed from which she did not rise for many months. After a partial recovery she sought another service place, but from impaired health was unable to do much work. She went from place to place and finally landed with Dr. Crocker of Huntington Avenue to whom she told the tale and who at once took steps to circulate, it to seek out Mr. and Mrs. Hanson, and to interest people in behalf of the girl whose health had reached such a stage that an early death was expected. The story caused a sensation and steps were taken to find and prosecute the slave holder. Money and gifts were offered the girl who received every attention with quiet dignity.After much trouble the Hanson family were located and interviewed. From letters front the girl's mother and former teacher in the possession of Mrs. Hanson it was found that almost every thing told by the girl was pure fabrication. The girl had left the south when about the age of fourteen in company with other girls and women seeking service places in the north. She had gone to Mrs. Hanson to take care of children and had lived with her two months only, during which time she had been out nearly every day with the children and at the time she was in very poor health.When the truth was discovered the girl was immediately despatcheddispatched to a hospital for treatment, and when last heard from had not been discharged.To those who saw the girl and heard the piteous tale she told, interrupted by the painfully drawn breath, who followed the details told so graphically it seemed almost impossible that the story should be a fabrication; and yet, without doubt, it is, and it is only repeated here in answer to many requests and for the benefit of many interested people who have learned the sequel for the first time.Whether the girl is mentally unbalanced is not known; in any case she is an interesting study to the psychologist.CHICAGO, ILL., Aug. 20, 1894.In the July number of the WOMAN'S ERA, in the biography of Mrs. R.E. Moore, written by Francis A. Lewis, the following statement occurred: "The Woman's Club of Chicago evolved from a meeting called by Mrs. Francis E. Harper while visiting Chicago during the World's Fair, etc." That portion of the statement referring particularly to our club I wish to correct. The I. B. W. Woman's Club of Chicago owes its existence solely to the zealous efforts of Miss Ida B. Wells. Will you kindly print the correction in the September ERA.ALICE L. HARVEY,Secretary,2966 Armour Ave.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 6. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ALTANTAATLANTA, GA.
REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D. D. President.
THIS Institution trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedom of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions from those who are willing to help towards their education. Write to the President.BOSTON TRAINING SCHOOL OF MUSICINCORPORATED
Vocal and Instrumental Music,
Harmony, Theory and Composition.
Pupils thoroughly Prepared for Teaching and Public Performance.
Central Location. CATALOGUE FREE.
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M., Director,
Music Hall Building, Boston, Mass.WHY YOU SHOULD SUBSCRIBE TO THE WOMAN'S ERA.Because it represents the best thought and work of the most advanced women of your race, and should therefore interest you.
Because it will keep you informed on matters you cannot afford to be ignorant of.
Because being a woman's movement, it is bound to succeed.
Because it is readable, it contains sixteen pages of solid matter, no plate matter, reprints, no filling up with headings and leads.
Because its subscription price is only one dollar a year.MUSICAL INSTRUCTION
JULY AND AUGUST.Summer School of Music
IN THE
Martha's Vineyard Summer Institute,
COTTAGE CITY. MASS.Four hundred to seven hundred students each season. Lessons in Piano, (practise Clavier Method), Singing, Harmony, Counterpoint and Musical Composition.Regular Course in Literature, Science and Art.A strong faculty of Eminent Teachers.ADDRESS,
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M,, Director of Boston Training School of Music.
20 Music Hall Building,
BOSTON, - MASS.BOSTON
Condensed Milk Co.'s
Plain condensed (unsweetened) Milk Is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. Sold in jars at the office, 2 1/2 Park Sq., Boston. Delivered three times per week.
ENDORSEMENT.
I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak, puny baby into a strong, plump one, after all other foods had failed.
MRS. MCGILL.
10 Lindall Place, Boston.F. S. BUTLER, Practical Tailor,
84 Mason St., Room 4, Boston. 
Ladies' and Gent's Clothing Cleansed Dyed, Repaired and Altered.MISS R. A. SMITH, Fashionable Dressmaker,
Orders promptly executed. All work guaranteed.
37 Anderson St., - Boston.Madame S. G. IRVEN'S FASHIONABLE
DRESSMAKING PARLORS,
KANSAS CITY, MO.
Colored Women's League, 1027 Charlotte St.MISS G. H. WILLIAMS,
BUSINESS ADVISER. 
Hours for Consultation,  4 P.M. to 9 P.M.
48 Charles St., Boston.
Trustworthy advice given on ALL subjects.HOUSEWIVES
Buy your Kerosene Oil and get the best water white oil off
C. H. YANCEY & BROTHERS, 
34 Kendall Street, Boston Mass.
Drop us a postal card, and we will call.
Because of the superior quality of this oil many members of the W. E. have pledged themselves to patronize these dealers.DR. R.B. CALLAWAY, DENTIST,
333 Tremont Street,  Boston.
OFFICE HOURS
9 A.M. to 1 P.M., and 1.30  to 6 P.M.Use Dr. Callaway's Saponaceous Tooth Powder. Price 25 Cents.M.D. JONES & CO.
REMOVED TO
368 WASHINGTON ST.,  BOSTON.
Cemetery Requisites
Decoration Day Supplies
Send for illustrated price listMCKENZIE & SMALLWOOD,
DEALERS IN
FINE : FOOTWEAR
OF ALL KINDS.
We also have with us Mr. PEGRAM, a first class shoemaker. Repairing neatly done. Also shoes made to order.
145 Cambridge St., Boston.THE
Great Historical Book
OF THE PRESENT TIME.
The Assassination of
LINCOLN,
By GEN. T. M. HARRIS.
A member of the Commission which tried the Assassins
Should be in every Household. 
PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED. 
Price in cloth, $2.50; hall Morocco, $3.50; full Morocco, $5.00.American Citizen Co.
7 Bromfeld St., Boston.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 6. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.DO YOU WANT
TO OWN YOUR OWN HOME?
THEN READ THIS!IF YOU WANT TO BUY A HOUSE IN CAMBRIDGE, SOMERVILLE, DORCHESTER OR EVERETT . . .
IT WILL PAY YOU TO CALL ONBALDWIN & DORSEY, Real Estate, Mortgage and Insurance Brokers,They make a specialty of property in the suburbs.
They furnish purchase money at low rates of interest.
They will lend you money to build a house on your own land.Stop! Pay no more Rent!  Begin now to buy your own home!BALDWIN & DORSEY, 
Real Estate, Mortgages and Insurance,
555 MAIN STREET,  CAMBRIDGEPORT.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
OF BOSTON Street Railway Builders and Contractors for Public Works.ESTIMATES MADE FOR A COMPLETE UNDERGROUND SYSTEM.GEO. S. BARNES. President.
STANLEY RUFFIN, Sec'y and Treas.
34 School Street, Boston.BUTLER R. WILSON,
ATTORNEY and COUNSELLOR AT LAW,
NOTARY PUBLIC.
34 School Street, (Room 33)
BOSTON.D. A. NEWCOMB & SON,
DEALER in 
Fresh, Salt and Smoked Fish.
Fresh opened Oysters and Clams.
194 Cambridge St.,  Boston, Mass.
Orders called for and delivered promptly.THE AMERICAN WRINGER CO.
Branch Store
13 & 15 BROADWAY EXTENSION. Boston, Mass.
Manufacturers of Clothes Wringers. 
All kinds of Wringers and Sweepers repaired.
Orders by mail promptly attended to.LESSONS BY MAIL.
Instructions in English Composition, Grammar, Use of Capitals, Punctuation, Formation of Sentences, etc. Address,
Miss M. W. GOULD, Box 165.  Readville, Mass.PRIVATE BOARD.MRS. ELIZABETH E. COOLEY will accommodate a few select boarders.
Transient or permanent,
AT 62 PHILLIPS ST., BOSTON.For Every Kind of PRINTING Go to
Chas. Alexander,
Publisher of THE MONTHLY REVIEW,
36 Columbus Avenue.  BOSTON.Enlarged Number Twenty PagesThe Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 8.BOSTON, MASS., NOV., 1894, PRICE 10 CENTS.THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the National Federation of Afro-American Women, and devoted to the Interests of the Women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country.Published monthly, in Boston, by JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, Editors and Publishers, 103 Charles Street.SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Club Rates, one hundred copies,   -    7.00Subscriptions Payable in Advance.NEW DEPARTMENTS.Conducted by Mrs. W.E. Matthews, New York; Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, Washington; Mrs. Fannie Barrier Williams, Chicago; Mrs. J. Silome Yates, Kansas City; Elizabeth P. Ensley, Denver; Alice Ruth Moore, New Orleans.NOTES AND COMMENTS.All loyal club women will patronize our advertisers, and so help to make our paper a valuable advertising medium. We are happy to be able to personally endorse nearly all the advertisers. In this connection, we would like to call especial attention to some of our advertisements.Mrs. Casneau makes and furnishes materials for a walking or visiting dress for $23.00. This hardly needs comment. A stylish, well-made cloth dress at $23.00 is a bargain, as the average woman must know.Harvey, on Temple Place, trims hats and bonnets for 50 cents; makes and trims for $1.00. This is something for the economical woman, who wishes to dress well, to know.Libby's millinery rooms, on Temple Place, are well known, as is also the beauty and style of the bonnets and hats which come from there. A unique department of the business is the making of bonnets through mail orders. If a description of hair, eyes and complexion is furnished, satisfactory head wear is guaranteed.At Roberts', 578 Washington street, can be had fifty kinds of candy for 12 cents per pound. This is something for women who get up sales, fairs, etc., to remember.Ray, on Chatham Row, sells a prepared icing which is so good it is called "Perfect Icing." What an advantage to have an icing which does not spoil or foment, all prepared for use. Ray also has a splendid complexion soap, "Mealine," which we can personally recommend. It is what few perfumed soaps seem to be--pure and efficacious.H.W. Berry, 646 Washington street, is agent for all the first-class pianos, Steinways, Chickerings, Kranich & Bach, H.F. Miller, etc., which he sells on easy terms; and if slightly used, at great reduction. Choosing a piano is an important matter, and it is well to know of a place to go where you can make no mistake.Baldwin & Dorsey, real estate agents, 555 Main street, Cambridge, are doing a business of which we ought to be proud. They have a well-equipped office, command all kinds of property in this city and suburbs, place mortgages, loan money, and build houses. They are young men of good business ability. It is an advantage which we hope our readers will embrace, to have the use of such an office as this.West End day at the World's Food Fair was one of the most successful of the month. The demonstrative lecture in the Home Department was by Mrs. Carrie Dearborn on "Chafing Dish Dainties." Nearly four hundred ladies were in attendance, closely following the preparations of devilled chestnuts, cheese foudufondu, and that last piece de resistance oyster rare-bit. The hygienic lunch, which followed the lecture, had been prepared in an Aladdin oven. The banquet table display was that for a bachelor's dinner.Why cannot the Domestic Science committee get up a course of lectures for the W. E. C.? Old methods in cooking, which considered only the palate, are becoming obsolete; nowadays, no cook is a cook unless she knows how to cook economically and healthfully, as well as palatably.NEW YORK.Victoria EarleGreeting.Victoria EarleVICTORIA EARLE, EDITOR.In entering upon the work of associate editor of the ERA, I do so with a firm faith in the power, responsibility and unlimited scope of woman's work, and its ennobling influence, when rightly placed and practically supported. I am proud to be associated with the splendid array of womanly women who will labor in the future for the success of this woman's venture, THE ERA, and with deep emotions of anxiety and hope, look to the women of my section to stand by me and hold up my hands. I beg their interest; I desire their support and sympathy. With it lies success; without it, failure and all its attendant humiliation. There is a great work to be done, but no one woman, or no ten women can carry the weight of this great undertaking--the successful establishment of a woman's high-class paper--without ressive masses with them. My experi- the past has taught me that women cantogether, when drawn together by something pure and noble, and I know that the one demand of the women of my section journalistically, is matter that shall appeal to the noblest sentiments and the most exalted ideals. I pledge my pen to all such as will aid in making this column the forum of discussion for all that shall interest, encourage and develop the highest type woman and the purest class of matter.CEDAR HILL AND ITS MASTER.Victoria EarleA Sketch of Frederick Douglass in his Home.After a pleasant drive through the Capitol grounds, and through the wide, tree-bordered streets and avenues of the city, we crossed a bridge spanning the eastern portion of the Potomac, and threaded our way through the modest village of Anacostia,--historic, as containing "Cedar Hill," the "House of the Hon. Frederick Douglass." Long before the wide, hospitable portals were reached the house could be seen nestling, as it were, in slumberous quiet 'neath great sighing trees.It sets north and south, planned after the typical southern fashion of more than a generation ago; a two-story and garret brick house painted white, green window blinds, a bay-window in the centre of the second story, two more at the eastern side of the large drawing-room. A wide, old-fashioned piazza runs the entire length of the front, the centre of which is decorated by open latticework, and the whole supported by four large white columns; wide steps running the limit of the piazza, which is fitted up with hammock, rustic seat and rockers - the very picture of repose, comfort, and all that is peaceful. The trees about seem to mark and emphasize the most attractive individuality of the place--retirement 'mid soft, shadowy lovlinessloveliness, the silent dispenser of rest,--"rest to the weary." So irresistible is this soothing atmosphere that one instinctively feels the charm of silence and meditative environment ere he has passed beyond the wide entrance of the spacious old mansion; but when in the imposing presence of its white-haired master everything seems absorbed by the stirring, fiery personality of a most wonderful man; not only wonderful among a class of people, but all men of the earth regardless of creed or condition -- he stands a living monument of the possibilities of man, a monument to the cause and principles that strong men have died for. The earth holds no nobler, no more truly great, none more worthy universal love and venerated esteem than this gentle-voiced, kindly-mannered, uncrowned king, whose reign and kingdom is the hearts of millions of men!There's a splendid slope on the western side of the house where he delights in standing, and well he might, for it has no equal in all the district. It commands an uninterrupted view of the city of Washington from an altitude of 133 feet, the gleaming waters of the placid Potomac shimmering between. From this point the great white dome of the Capitol can be seen and, close by, the beautiful structure, designed and now in course of building for the Congressional Library, of pure white marble in strong contrast to the Capitol. It is crowned with a massive golden dome --like the sun and silver of youth and age together they stand surrounded by every condition of human life and progress; and still, beyond to the west, the great Washington monument towers over 550 feet mid-air. A clear morning, the scene unfolds before the observers on Cedar Hill like a dream city born of inspiration, and established by enchantment; and peculiarly impressive it all is when Frederick Douglass stands there with uncovered bead, his fine white hair blowing with the breeze, his massive form erect, standing out in bold relief with his beloved trees as a back-

ground. Marvelous changes of time and state, time-honored gradations of earthly power, inspired touch of Poesy and Romance, when compared with the meed of his experience, pale into feebleness, for no character known to authentic history has encompassed more of the extremes of life than his, and will in time prove, if it has not already proven, the beautiful source of inspiration to not only the emotional muse of poetry, but the fiery realms of heroic tragedy as, well. His course from the beginning stands forth to the world as America's great epic. Who has conquered and vanquished greater foes and obstacles, single-handed, than he? Nobly he wears the weight of three-score and ten years of active usefulness, his vision clear, and his step as active as most men twenty years younger, The great parts he has played in the most tragic scenes of American life have not, as one might have supposed, left him shorn of the faculty of enjoying quiet; not so; he has emerged from the din of battle grateful for the quiet meditative silence of his beloved home.His home life is simple and altogether free from restraint. The world of good people is made welcome at his portals, character and worth being the passports required. No distinctions are made socially ; it is man and woman, regardless of color, past condition or inheritance, and daily there are pictures seen and enacted here rarely met with beyond the limits of a grand stage.I call to mind one gem-like evening when, in the ordinary course of neighbors dropping in, a beautiful golden-haired maiden presided at the piano; and among the company were two elderly gentlemen, father and son, the latter an artist of great merit, -- Messer, I think, is the name -- the elder, like Mr. Douglass, is a performer on the violin. After considerable music, vocal and instrumental, with a kindly twinkle in his eyes, the elder Mr. Messer passed to Mr. Douglass' side with his mellow-toned instrument, and awakened the familiar strains of "Auld Lang Syne." Bending low, with his eyes fixed upon the "Sage of Anacostia," his whitened hair in picturesque harmony  with Mr. Douglass' snowy locks, as the sweet familiar tones vibratedon the air, about the works were sung with thrilling effect by "Our Douglass," the picture they made was worthy a painter's brush. Few eyes in that room were undimmed with tears when the music ceased; but such is of ordinary occurrence at Cedar Hill. I have said his home life is simple; well, it is. He rises very early, and before breakfast it is his habit to stroll about his grounds, which consist in all about sixteen acres of undulating land, partly under cultivation, raising sufficient fruit and vegetables for the family use, and flowers for the dainty decoration of table and parlors. I felt very proud, on my first morning stroll, to be rewarded by a cluster of white southern lilies culled and presented me by my honored and revered host, whose mind and heart has caused lilies of thought and resolution to spring into rich growth in every clime where'er civilization extends. He breakfasts with the family at 7 A. M., after which he retires to a quaint retreat in the rear of the mansion, a tiny structure looking more like a fine "mi lady " doll house than anything else; it is Mr. Douglass' "sanctum sanctorum," however, known as the "Growlery " (from Dickens). It is almost covered with vines and embowered by tall lilac shrubs. The Growlery is sufficiently removed from the house to insure absolute quiet; it contains, besides a comfortable lounge, a brick hearth and modern grate for winter use, a tall desk, where Mr. Douglass does his writing standing there's just room enough for the books and papers of immediate necessity, and himself, and, what is dearer to him than strangers can at first understand, his croquet set. To say that he is an ardent admirer of the game is to express it mildly--he is more--an enthusiast, and as everyone is aware who knows, even slightly, the domestic side of his nature, that he is an expert player. After spending the morning in his Growlery (as if he ever needed a place in which to growl !)he emerges in answer to the midday dinner-bell, after which he watches the sun gradually recede from his croquet lawn, and so soon as it is sufficiently shady, and the work dress of blue is replaced by it fine white flannel, he is ready for his game. The ladies of the house are all good players, Mrs. Douglass and Miss Fog particularly so. Frequently such men as the Hon. John R. Lynch, Mr. Bailey, president of the Capitol Savings Bank, Mr. Robt. Terrell and many others, find relaxation from business cares in this absorbing diversion. Mr. Douglass' grandson, Joselph Douglass, the gifted violinist, is spoken of as a most excellent shot; Mrs. Robt. Terrell and Mrs. Lewis Douglass are particularly noted not only for thier skill, but for certain charming qualities, which tend to enliven and make wonderfully entertaining the game, even for losers. It is very amusing to watch a contest between Mr. Douglass and the above mentioned gentlemen, they are all so

serious. They do not regard their bost's career in their contests; they play seriously to win. But Mr. Douglass rarely misses an aim, and his superior skill is best evidenced by his unerring field shots. To watch his lively interest in following the game and the course of a ball, his field being large, one could easily fancy him a score younger than his own figures testify; his vitality is a constant source of happy amazement to all who enjoy the privilege of either taking sides with or against him. As a rule the tea-bell ends the contests, and after a light repast the evening is given over to the most pleasurable diversion offering itself--sometimes quiet chat, in which reminiscences take the lead, a game of checkers or music. Just before retiring, after "good night " has been said to guests in general, 'tis his regular custom to smoke one segar, sitting in a big rocker on the piazza, listening to the murmuring sound of insect life, or wandering up and down the grounds watching with quiet interest the myriads of twinkling lights, that mark the pathway of the gently gliding Potomac and' stretching around and through the city beyond ; and now that skill and science has succeeded in illuminating the headdress of the Goddess of Liberty on the Capitol, it is indeed an uplifting picture.The family habits are about the same day after day; the most notable changes being the guests that journey over long distances to stand in the presence of Frederick Douglass; and the tide is largely like that one, known to poesy, that goes on forever.Men of affairs, women too, come for guidance; and minds, restless with the fires of ambition, journey here for inspiration, and to all he is, in the purest sense, sire, brother, and Pythian friend. Though his voice may not often be heard from the public rostrum, yet, watchful and alert, he dwells upon his beloved Hill living the theory of manhood he advocated in the very beginning of his struggles for freedom -- that manhood, womanhood, in its truest sense is not, cannot be, confined to caste, race or nation."We ask not for his lineage,We ask not for his nameIf manliness be in his heart,He noble birth may claim.We ask not from what land he came,Nor where his youth was nursed,If from the stream, it matters not,The spot from whence it burst."VICTORIA EARLE.WASHINGTON.Mary Church TerrellMARY CHURCH TERRELL.Prologue.To one and all we bow,And solemnly do vowTo do our level best,But you must do the rest.Though critics laugh and railWe'll neither quake nor quail.No poet Keats are we,As you can plainly see.And if we entertain,In sad or mirthful strain,Sufficient is the meed,To know that we succeed.Prospectus.The news found on the page devoted to the Nation's Capital will be social, literary, philosophical and otherwise, particularly the latter, when the others fail. Not so much social as to make those of a literary turn of mind wish there was no such thing as society; not so much literary as to make those of a social nature sigh, with Solomon that "Of making many books there is no end;" and much study is a weariness of the flesh; not so much philosophy as to impress the reader with the hopeless ignorance of the writer. So much for good intentions, which pave the way to success, as well as to other places of which we have all heard.We shall not be slaves to the grammar of the English language--what there is of it. We shall say "we," when it suits our purpose, and "I" when occasion requires, rules for the agreement of the pronoun to the contrary, notwithstanding. The fashion to ruthlessly ignore rules and principles of English Grammar was inaugurated by a certain Saxon Gamaliel, prominent in school circles here, when he boldly declared "It is me " to be both correct and elegant. It is natural, then, that we lesser lights, following in the light of the leader, feel encouraged to commit manifold infractions of grammatical rules, not sanctioned outside of our progressive literary circles.Washington schemes reserve the right to be as impracticable as they are illogical. Living in a city whose atmosphere is surcharged with 

the virulent germs of congressional theory, we object to having any plan or project that may hereafter appear subjected to the cold, hard test of logic or common sense.Miss Ida A. Gibbs, a graduate of the classical course of Oberlin College, has recently been appointed teacher in the High School here.The first colored woman who received the degree of A.B. in the United States was Mary J. Patterson, who graduated from Oberlin College in '62. The schools of the district have sustained an irreparable loss in the death of Miss Patterson, who, for twenty-five years, rendered valuable service as a teacher. When Oberlin College opened its doors to women, she was courageous, indeed, who dared to brave public opinion by taking what was commonly called the gentleman's course, on the principle that it belonged exclusively to the lords of creation, and no women need apply. only 3-oan 'g women of the loftiest ambition and the keenest thirst, for knowledge presented themselves -,is candidates for the degree of A. B. Miss Patterson was among the first to prove to the world that Greek and the higher mathematics could be mastered not only by young women of the favored race, but by their sisters of the oppressed race as well. Nothing better reveals the fine spirit, the resolute will, and the strong intellectuality of Miss Patterson than her decision to take and complete the classical course at that period.The Colored Woman's League has been invited to send delegates to the National Council of Women of the United States, to convene them from Feb. 17 to March 2, 1895. One spokesman will be elected to bring greetings from the League to the Council. Only national Organizations are invited to participate in the meetings, on account of the large number of societies of which the Council is composed. Such an invitation from such an important body as the Council furnishes another proof of the advantage of a national organization of colored women. If they are to become an important factor in solving the knotty problems of race and sex, they must get a hearing, and play a conspicuous part in the deliberations which look toward that end. Let them unite themselves into one grand national organization which shall extend from the Pacific to the Atlantic, and from Maine to the Gulf.Mrs. A.J. Cooper, Mrs. Grimke and Mr. John Wesley Cromwell read papers on Negro Folk Music at the last meeting of the Washington Folk Lore Society. This organization has not allied itself to the American Folk Lore Society, although it has been cordially invited to do so, because it sees fit to work alone. While they plod alone, they will also profit alone, when the results of their researches are given to the public. This is by no means a bad idea. With Rev. Alex. Crummell as president, Mrs. A. J. Cooper as corresponding secretary, and Miss Clara Smith its recording secretary, the success of the society is assured.The reception given by the Misses Welsh to Miss Blanche Songo of Philadelphia and Miss McKinley of Columbia, S. C. , was a brilliant success from all points of view. Nothing, could have been daintier and sweeter than the ladies who graced the occasion, and nothing more courtly and chivalrous than the gentlemen in attendance.Mr. Gerrett S. Wormley, Jr., grandson of Wormley of hotel fame, recently wedded Miss Rebecca Webster. By the way, speaking of brides and grooms, Mr. and Mrs. Frank Downing, recently married in Brooklyn, are spending part of their honeymoon in our city, and are the recipients of much social attention.A mending bureau has been started here with every prospect of success. Mending of all kinds is done with neatness and dispatch. What a boon such a bureau must be to our friends, the bachelors! But -- will it encourage them to prolong their single blessedness? If so, can the mending bureau really be encouraged and countenanced by benevolent beings? Verily, there's no rose without some thorn on this mundane sphere."What do you think our Washington men admire most and can tolerate least in a woman?" asked a young lady of an inquiring turn of mind, not long since. "Now, that's hard to tell," said a wise sister some years her Senior. "I believe beauty is the surest road to success," said a friend who overheard the conversation. "By no means," said the wiseacre to whom the first question was propounded; "there are more exceptions to the rule of beauty than can be found in an English spelling-book." "Is it intelligence?" persisted

the young lady, more anxious and more interrogative than ever. "Just the faintest suspicion of that; just enough to be a bit witty and able to see the point of a stray joke which the hero of the hour sees fit to perpetrate," continued the Minerva of the group. "The young men seem to forgive a lack of brain more easily than they can the absence of other qualities," she continued; "no, no, child, don't give too much time to the cultivation of the brain, if you want to be a reigning belle here. Spend your extra time and money in adorning the person, and let your mind take care of itself, if you want the men to admire you. Be known as a power in the world of fashion. Always be fin de siecle in the matter of hats, gowns and all the appointments of dress, and the victory is yours. There are several cases to prove the point. There was Miss"-- But here the interesting conversation on the peculiarities of the Washington beaux was interrupted by one of the very species upon whom so much philosophy and logic had been brought to bear. This conversation set me to thinking. I wonder what Washington men really admire most and can tolerate least in a woman? Will someone answer this weighty question?"How can young women enjoy foot-ball so much?" queried it friend of a college graduate, not long since. "To me it seems a brutal sport, in spite of the sanction given it by English and American universities. It gives me a chill to hear a young woman rhapsodize over the game, for it seems incongruous with womanly delicacy. Yes, I know some very fine women enthuse over the game, but if they are sound on other points, I explain this little weakness by ascribing it to a mental obliquity in the first stage of development!" "It is it fad to rave over foot-ball," explained a young co-ed in a tone of horror and disgust. "If you can not thrill over center-rushes, halfbacks and touch-downs, you label yourself a relic of the candle and bird-cage crinoline period." "It is a brutal sport," persisted the first speaker, just as firm and as far from conversion to the new regime as ever. "Harvard is to be congratulated upon having a sensible president, who discourages foot-ball, as it is now played, and is doing his utmost to have the brutality and barbarity eliminated from it."Read our advertisements.LOUISIANA.Alice Ruth MooreALICE RUTH MOORE, EDITOR. How few of us,In all the world's great ceaseless struggling strife,Go to our work with gladsome, buoyant step,And love it for its sake, whate'er it be.Because it is a labor, or, mayhap,Some sweet, peculiar art of God's own gift,And not the promise of the world's slow smileOf recognition, or of Mammon's gilded grasp,Alas, how few, in inspirations dazzling flash,Or spiritual sense of worlds beyond the domeOf circling blue around this weary earth,Can bask, and know the God given graceOf genius' fire that flows and permeatesThe virgin mind alone, the soul in whichThe love of earth hath tainted not,The love of art, and art alone.After many years of waiting, the colored women of New Orleans have at last organized a Woman's Club. New Orleans has her Portia Club, her Quarantes and Geographic, but their doors are opened only to the more favored sisters. For a long while there were faint hints of it following in this line, but it was not until the 6th of October that nineteen women, old and young, met in the basement of the Tulane Ave. Baptist church to discuss the plans for a woman's club. The gathering, as a whole, seemed ripe for the movement, and without further parley, the organization was effected, and officers elected as follows: Mrs. Sylvanie F. Williams, president; Mrs. Odalie Morse-Jackson, vice-president; Mrs. Hattie Jackson-Moore secretary ; Miss H. V. Feger, treasurer.A committee composed of Mrs. M. A. Williams, Miss Arabella Kennedy, Miss Clara J. Isabelle, and Miss Alice Ruth Moore, was appointed to draw up a constitution. The club met on the 17th again, with a much increased membership, and adopted the name of the Phyllis Wheatley Club, adopted the constitution, and declared the WOMAN'S ERA its official organ.Mrs. Williams outlined the work of the club as follows: It should be divided into a certain number of committees on different subjects, each committee to be devoted exclusively to its line of work, the general work to be arranged and outlined by the executive committee. As they now stand, the committees are:Executive, Mrs. M. A. Williams, Miss Arabella Kennedy, Mrs. Annie Whittaker.Temperance, Miss Emma Rose Williams, chairman.Hospitals, Miss Adele J. Townsend, chairman.Literature, Miss Elvise Bibb, chairman.History and Law, Miss Emma Maria Williams, chairman.Newspaper and Current Events, Miss Alice Ruth Moore, chairman.Philanthropy, Prisons, etc., Mrs. M. C. Tumer, chairman.Anti-Pugilistic, Anti-Cigarette, Miss Arabella Kennedy, chairman.Health vs. Filth, Mrs. Alice B. Clarke, chairman.Free Night Schools, Mrs. S. A. Gates, chairman.Self-help, Miss Maria M. Wicker, chairman.Social Purity, Mrs. Mena McNeal, chairman.But for the twelfth committee, and, in some respects, the most important, Suffrage, the brave mortal has not yet been found to stand at its mast-head.The Colored Teachers' League of New Orleans is not a woman's affair, by any means. No, it is redeemed from the flatness and general unprofitableness of a gathering in petticoats by three real, live, flesh and blood, healthy men, principals in the public schools. After a three months' vacation, the League began its winter session on the 20th, and held the annual election of officers, Mrs. S.A. Gates being elected president; vice-president, Miss Emma V. Lopez; secretary, Miss Sarah Allen ; assistant-secretary, Miss Clara M. Holland; treasurer, Mrs. F. E. Chester.There is growing up in this city a musical circle as interesting and as absorbing as any that ever clustered about the confines of a rare old town, with a conservatory in the distance, and the melodious chime of cathedral bells, and violin tones quivering in the fragrant air. While music has always found its home here, music of the sweetest and rarest kind, yet it is only lately that a real atmosphere of the scientific study of the art has found its way among us; and now it has progressed so rapidly and so completely that for many of the gayest votaries of society, there is nothing so supremely important as the alternation of lesson and study. Orchestras and quartettes and trios, violins, cornets, violas, violoncellos, mandolins, men and women, boys and girls, enthusiastically push our city forward as one of the great musical centres of the south.For two months it hasn't rained here, and New Orleans is very warm and thirsty. Her clothes look gray and her linen is yellow from being washed in bad and insufficient water. Her face is breaking out in pimples from drinking and bathing in unaccustomed river water. The big cisterns stand dry and empty and cracked. The heated, stifling air chokes with its blinding, suffocating whirls and eddies of smoke. The sky hangs blue, brightly, dazzlingly blue overhead, and the sun, as he sinks to rest, is buried in clouds of dust vapors, and New Orleans chokes and coughs and gasps, and execrates the Public Works Commissioner. Houses are barred tightly, dungeon-like, to keep out the insidious dust. The teeth grit upon mouthfuls of it. The universal prayer and cry is rain, rain!Down in Frenchtown, pilgrimages and nouvenas are made to St. Avegne, and candles burned at the altar of the gracious saint. The children kill spiders and drown many a hapless snail in order to induce rain, and even tie the old red rag around the cistern faucet and dance the rain-song, but in vain.In school, the 9.30 bell has rung, and three or four boys struggle in, warm from running to school, tired and listless-looking. But how can one reprimand them for tardiness, when the invariable answer will be:"Well, teacher, wha' fo' I come to school late? Wha' I go do? Ma mere, she wash and de cistern empty. Den I got tote water, eh? I run fast, but no use. You call me up."Or a note from the mother:To
Teacher (Mrs. ----Dr Mrs:Plese oxcose my son Emile. I need him home this monin to tote de 1'eau.FromHis Mother.In one of our newspaper offices here, an enthusiastic young McKinleyite--girl, of course--has decorated the Protectionist's picture with red ink, in profusion, about the coat, neck, checks and nose; the bright, bright blue of the editorial pencil adorns his eyes and cravat, and stuck sundry green card-board mascot bows about the corners of the picture; and written under it all, in letters of blue and red, tipsily askew, thus:O R  E
 U  N  XTP E
 R SIDENT.She says she "didn't go to do it, but they came that way."The Claremont, Va., Institute.--The W.E.C. Cannot Endorse It.A short time ago it came to the knowledge of the Woman's Era Club that the institute at Claremont, Va., Rev. John J. Smallwood, president, needed assistance. With the view of giving what aid it could, the Club instituted inquiries as to the condition of this school. At its last regular meeting, the Club decided that, unless some very damaging disclosures recently made, as to the moral conduct of the school, are explained away, they can neither aid nor endorse that, nor any other educational work projected and carried on by John J. Smallwood.ADVERTISE IN THE WOMAN'S ERATHE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTEREST OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.The WOMAN'S ERA, as the organ of the colored women's clubs, has a large circulation in many of the large cities, notably Boston, New Bedford, Providence, New York, Chicago, Washington and Kansas City.The Literary, Musical, and Domestic Departments are under the control of competent writers and critics.With its large circulation among women, and particularly among women of the refined and educated classes, it offers peculiar advantages to advertisers of household articles, wearing apparel, books, magazines, musical instruments, and so forth.Its rates are exceedingly liberal.Try it, and you will not regret it.EDITORIAL.A Word to the A. A. W.The A.A.W. (Association for the Advancement, of Women) holds its twenty-second congress October 31st, November 1st and 2nd, at Knoxville, Tenn.The deliberations of this body are always of great importance to women. With Julia Ward Howe as its president, and the representative women of America composing its body, it has grown to be one of the greatest factors of the day in the development. and progress of woman.The association stands now in an enviable position; it sees its labors crowned with much success, and very little standing in the way of future efforts; it sees--as we all see--the almost boundless possibilities of the American white woman; it sees the especial consideration which she enjoys in this country, anything being possible to her except the act of voting, and her growing influence now almost unlimited.Realizing, as it must, all this, we want to say a word to the A.A.W. on the responsibility of the white women for the wrongs and outrages done the black race in this country. Most of these have been and are of a nature that little more than a word from a white woman would have effectually stopped numberless acts of annoyance, injustice, and even outrage. Think of the refined, sensitive colored girls who have been literally thrown out of first-class cars in the south without it protest, when a protest would have been so effectual; think of the ambitious, noble-minded women of the south who are shut out from every elevating influence in the shape of lectures, libraries, etc.; think of the lynchings incited by white women, and not one ever prevented by them.Policy and expediency are supposed to be unknown to bodies of women in their deliberations, and from this man has raised one of his chief arguments against woman suffrage. In spite of this, it has been one of woman's strong points that she has put right before expediency, and we would suggest to the A. A. W. that they cast aside policy and expediency, and boldly face this race question. It is it question which they can not longer evade. We thoroughly believe that it is the women of America--black and white--who are to solve this race problem, and we do not ignore the duty of the black women in the matter. They must arouse, educate and advance themselves; they are to exert that influence through the homes, the schools and the churches that will build up an intelligent, industrious and moral people. Their duty is plain and must be done. But the white woman has a duty in the matter also; she must see to it that no obstructions are placed in the way of a weak, struggling people; She must no longer consent to be passive. We call upon her to take her stand.The National Council of Women.The National Council of Women, which convenes in Washington, D.C., in February, has invited the Colored Women's League of Washington to be represented at the Convention. The Washington League, with broad-minded courtesy, has made its committee so large as to be able to include delegates front other colored women's leagues, and has invited such leagues to send delegates.Unfortunately, a majority of the members of the Woman's Era Club of Boston did not see the advantages of being so represented, and voted not to send a delegate. In spite of this fact, which we regret very much, we hope to see the colored women of all sections represented at the coming council. In any event, Washington is prepared to ably represent the race.Again the Convention.With our new departure, we again bring forward our suggestion of a convention. We hope our readers will open the matter again with renewed interest, and that the summer of '95 will see a great congress of the colored women of America.The Woman's Leagues are opening the season with new enthusiasm and energy. They are inaugurating their work along their own especial lines, and the year is full of promise. It is hoped that the clubs will not fail of a coming together at the close or the season, with all that means of helpfulness, inspiration and broadening. Let us all work together to bring it about.We as a race, have been so cramped that we women have unavoidably grown narrow and selfish to an extent. It is for this reason we pray for a convention, with its widening effect on the  mental, moral and physical vision.St. Thomas Celebration.The centennial celebration of St. Thomas P. E. church, in Philadelphia, in October, was an event of great importance. After one hundred years, the church is still in a most flourishing condition. A celebration of this kind stamps us completely American. Think of this, and the talk of naturalized foreigners of sending us back to Africa "where we belong!"As the editor of this paper has been unable to attend the Congress of the A. A. W., now in session al Knoxville, Tenn., as was her intention, she has sent, as a substitute, a large number of ERAs to be distributed among the delegates.The Association of Educators of Colored Youth will hold their next congress in London, Eng., and will arrange tours on the continent, of Europe.This is an excellent idea, and we have no doubt that it will be a brilliant success.Aside from the value of having so fine a body of colored People conduct their deliberations among the friendly English, there will be many colored people to take advantage of this opportunity of a European tour with congenial company. It is a splendid thing in every way.In introducing our associates to our readers, we need hardly to say a word. They speak for themselves. We are proud to present to our people such an array of fine women and writers. With such a force, the possibilities of the ERA are unlimited in the way of intellectual tone and strength, and only limited to the extent that people are willing to support the paper. There is yet to be found the person who will not acknowledge that the ERA is a necessity, and a necessity well met; there is yet to be found the person who, knowing of it, is not anxious to read it, even if she does not buy it, The ERA should he twice its present size--everything warrants it--except its financial returns. A thousand new subscribers--two hundred front each of the cities directly represented in the paper would warrant a larger paper. Only this number in a country where a million women read the paper! We believe our women are loyal; when individually appealed to, they have given us enthusiastic support; but they need to be aroused. No other paper in America does for our women just what the ERA does; no other paper is so entirely their medium. Let them realize this and do their duty like, no, not like men, but like women. Do not be content to subscribe yourself, but urge your friends to subscribe.Miss Baldwin, whose offer of a home for a girl while studying, was made through these columns last month, has received and is still receiving numbers of letters from worthy girls. It is Miss Baldwin's desire to secure a girl of more than ordinary promise, one who would be especially responsive to the especial advantages to be obtained here in New England; for such a girl as this, Miss Baldwin would so use her influence that nothing need stand in the way of her protegee's intellectual advancement, not even the doors of Radcliffe College. While choosing, Miss Baldwin receives many eloquent letters. It has occurred to us, while reading letters from girls well-endorsed as to character, capability and industriousness, that there might be many families in the north who would be glad to receive in their midst such girls, and who, in exchange for the companionship and services such a girl could give, would give her a good home while going to school. It is quite as well to state in this connection that the offer made by Miss Baldwin is entirely one-sided; all she asks or desires in return is the intellectual progress of her protegee.It is the desire of this paper to be a medium

between people who could be mutually helpful. We will be glad to find homes for good girls and girls for good homes. Anyone desiring either are invited to correspond with us on the matter.Where You Can Get the Era.THE WOMAN'S ERA can always be had at the following places:BOSTON.103 Charles St.
Miss Stewart, 37 Buckingham St.
Car Station, corner Charles and Cambridge Sts.
Reed's, Cambridge St.
Crawford's, Phillips St.
Miss Grandison, 17 Hovey Ave., Cambridge.NEW YORK.Mrs. Victoria Matthews, 9 Murray St.PHILADELPHIA.Church Supply Co., 254 South Eleventh St.WASHINGTON.Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, 1936 4th. St.
The Colored American, 906 E St.CHICAGO.Mrs. Fannie Barrier Williams, 377 42nd St.DENVER.Mrs. Elizabeth P. Ensley, 1755 Ogden Ave.KANSAS CITY, MO.Mrs. J. Silome Yates 3116 E. 19th St.NEW ORLEANSMiss Alice Ruth Moore, 55 Palmyra St.ST. JOHN, N.B.Mrs. Whetsel.Mr. Richings has been heard from in England, where he is supplementing Miss Wells' work in behalf of the colored people of America, with his illustrated lecture. At the close of a recent lecture given in Pembroke Chapel, Liverpool, a cordial vote of thanks was passed to Mr. Richings for his interesting lecture, general agreement being expressed with him in the great progress made by the colored people.The Domestic Science committees of the women's clubs should be made up of some of the brightest, most up-to-date members. Their opportunities for helpfulness are greater than all others.SOCIAL NOTES.NEW YORK."Such a time I always have hat hunting!""Do you? You poor thing! Where do you go?""Everywhere, anywhere," the most tired-looking "poor thing," wearily drawled on a car making for 14th st. I am sure I wish we didn't have to wear hats.""Why don't you let Leon buy and make them?""Leon--make--my hats!" she gasped."Mine are specimens," she gurgled."Oh, how lovely! A dream thought! Oh, you sweet! I am younger immediately."The car stopped and the "poor thing" and the "sweet" disappeared. Match1ess woman! who'd ever have thought of calling a hat a "dream thought?" Splendid woman! As they passed from my gaze I could see billowy lace lightly resting on raven tresses, held in place by a gleaming comblet. Ah, my masters, strange things go to make up dreams.A bright ray of light has fallen aslant the great Downing patronymic, and all society is busily engaged in recherche anticipations of the event. The bride that is to be is one of the sweetest little maidens in all the "city of churches," and "gallant Frank," as the hoys call him at times, is a prime favorite. When the 17th arrives, brilliants will flash and sparkle and soft silks will lend elegance to a scene that happy hearts and beautiful faces will make one to be long remembered. 'Tis a real love match.Judging by thoughts culled from many sources, the school question is still reckoned among explosives.Speaking of the school question, according to the Brooklyn member of the board, our young girls will have to be cooks and scullions in the future, unless colored schools are nurtured.It is understood on good authority that the schools known as Mrs. Garnet's and Mr. Reason's are to be consolidated on one count. It is a pity, for Mrs. Garnet tried so hard to get Miss Eato made principal as successor to the late Charles L. Reason.There is not a teacher in Our midst more deserving of such promotion than Miss Eato, from many points of view. She is one whom New Yorkers --Knickerbockers-- are truly proud of; she is

the essence of cultured constancy and a most unswerving adherent to duty. Her presence, while strong and reliant, is one of the most restful known to me.Counsellor Stewart wore rather a concerned expression when Mr. Braxton finally concluded the transactions that made him counsellor for St. Philips corporation. It's a good move. Mr. Stewart has demonstrated many times that he possesses the ability that St. Philips needs, and the vestrymen have proved their race royalty by securing his services. Such procedure will inevitably vanquish the so-called race problem.The saddest event to chronicle is the death of Mrs. Chas. Boyd, nee Delia Washington."Leaves have their time to fall,And flowers wither at the north wind's breath And stars to set, and allThou hast all seasons for thine own, O death!"The bereaved family have the sympathy of hosts of friends.Messrs. V. A. Montgomery and "our" Harry Burleigh go to Philadelphia on the 18th to take part in the Bergen concert.St. Philips Guild is by far the most dignified body of men in the public gaze just now. Its ever genial master, J. J. Atwell, has been sent as a delegate to the Episcopal convention sitting in Philadelphia, having the courtly vice-Guild Master, F. H. Carmand, to preside and deliver the address on the 18th.The Centennial celebration at St. Thomas P. E. church in Philadelphia bids fair to assume most interesting proportions. All Gotham is waiting to hear all about St. Philips' choir; the boys are working hard and Mr. Kenney looks a little "oldish," but of course they'll do finely. A special car will take them over. Among those who will accompany them will be Messrs. Mars, Braxton, Smith, Barrows, Ray, Anthony, Attwell, Burleigh, Gray, Mrs. Annie Dias, Mesdames Francis Attwell, Hymen Dorsey, Miss Imogen Howard, Mrs. F. H. Carmand and son Frankie. Victoria Earle also journeyed to the Quaker City.The venerable-looking Frederick Barbadoes passed through Gotham a few days ago, looking as frisky as ever, on his way in search of matter for a book. This column will endeavor to secure a first volume.The Woman's Loyal Union seem to be up and doing; they are not only flooding New York and Brooklyn with petitions for the enactment of the Blair Joint Resolution, but will manage for the benefit of their treasury a large reception on the 13th of November, at Lyric Hall, at which ex-minister John Durham and Mrs. Fanny Jackson Coppin will make -addresses. They deserve the patronage of the people.The Woman's Loyal Union have succeeded in stirring up the preachers of this city and were the inspiration that led to the organization of a preachers' meeting. They will manage a grand union meeting for the purpose of endorsing the Woman's Loyal Union's efforts in arousing the people to the necessity of acting at once on the Blair Joint Resolution.The pastor of Bethel Church is one of the brainiest men in town. In a quiet way he is talking and some of the biggest men in his church are quaking. Truly the breath of reform is abroad.Bethel's progressive minds have decided to have a "Brooklyn Literary Union." They will associate Victoria Earle, T. T. Fortune, T. McCantz Stewart, L. H. Latimer, J. C. Carter, and many others. Quite a tally-ho.One of the prettiest girls in town is the black-eyed miss who occasionally officiates at the organ at St. Bartholomew's mission; in fact, she has most beautiful eyes.How funny! Our Bob's chum eats his weeds instead of smoking them. Its too costly a luxury for most of us.Sometime in the future we will all give a party forANNO DOMINO 1894.BOSTON.The B.M.C. of the I.O.O.F. made quite a big ripple in Boston's social life; besides those large affairs given in honor of the convention there have been numerous small functions incidental to the presence of distinguished people in the city.The grand ball at Music Hall was a crush, and consequently a success of the biggest kind; the hall packed, the costumes exceedingly fine, the music and supper good. Among the attractive ladies here because of the convention, were Mrs. Van Dusen (who accompanied her husband) and Miss Dickson of Erie, Pa. These ladies were taken in charge by Mrs. E. E. Brown and Mrs. J. H. Lewis, who devoted themselves to showing the people and sights of Boston to the visitors.During the week Mrs. U.A. Ridley gave a reception, Mrs. Joseph Lee a dinner, and Mrs. P.A. Glover a dance in honor of Miss Mollie Durham and the Hon. John S. Durham of Philadelphia.The week following Mrs. E.E. Brown gave a card party for Mrs. Van Dusen and Miss Dickson.Dr. and Mrs. Grant's "at homes" bring together a goodly number of friends on Monday nights.Mrs. B. R. Wilson gave a dinner on the 13th which was delightful in every way; the exquisite silver, china and glass received by her as wedding gifts set the table off to perfection.Mrs. Harriet Bell of New York made a short visit to Boston the latter part of October, the guest of Mrs. Ransom.The friends of Mr. and Mrs. Lewis Terry are daily expecting to be called upon for congratulations.Dr. Milton Brown went on to Baltimore to take the examinations necessary for admission to practice in that City.KANSAS CITY.Madame Watson Griffin is doing for Kansas City's vocal talent what Prof. Lee has done in an instrumental line. Both are possessed of excellent professional merit and are meeting with great success.The members of the Attucks Club entertained their lady friends on the 17th ult. in their new parlors, corner of Sixth and Charlotte.The Rev. Marshall of St. Augustine's Mission will be ordained at Grace Church, Nov. 21st.Miss Anna H. Jones, of Lincoln High School, has received a call to occupy a position in the High School of Washington, D.C.Miss Rice, the new supervisor or teacher of drawing, is giving complete satisfaction.Miss Frances Willard, during her recent talk in Philadelphia, made an urgent plea for funds to be used in the work of organizing colored women of the South in the interests of temperance and social purity.J.S.Y.Mrs. Fannie Barrier Williams, our Chicago editor, has been seriously ill, but she has rallied to send us the timely article published in this number.ILLINOIS.Fannie Barrier WilliamsFANNIE BARRIER WILLIAMS, EDITOR.Women in Politics.American women are beginning to see the end of their years of struggle for equality of suffrage. The arguments are nearly all in and the signs of a favorable verdict are every where apparent to those who understand the trend of things.Fragmentary suffrage, now possessed by women in nearly all the states of the union, carries with it the triumph of the principal contended for, and its extension to complete and national suffrage is as logically certain as any thing can be. Just how soon the complete enfranchisement of women will be realized depends largely upon the use we make of our present gains. The false reasoning of the opposition having been overcome, we have now to fight only the prejudices in opposition. When the opposing man sees women actually voting, and looks in vain for the evils predicted, his prejudices will yield and he will gladly join the forces that are fast making for their complete emancipation.Nothing in the whole social progress of humanity is more interesting and more suggestive of the persistency of rightness than the steady gain of womankind in those larger relationships of human life and civilization, in which the stronger, as well as the gentler virtues, are tending to increase her importance.Are women ready to assume the of this new recognition of their worth? This question is of immense importance to colored women. For the first time in our history we are to receive public attention and have our womanly worth tested by the high standards of important public duties.Must we begin our political duties with no better or higher conceptions of our citizenship than that shown by our men when they were first enfranchised? Are we to bring any refinement of individuality to the ballot box? Shall we learn our politics from spoilsmen and bigoted partisans, or shall we learn it from the school of patriotism and an enlightened self-interest? If our enfranchisement means only a few more votes added to the republican and democratic sides, respectively, of political issues, there certainly has been no gain for the cause of principle in American politics. If our enfranchisement is to contribute nothing to the corrective forces of independence in American

politics, there will be much disappointment among those who believed that the cause of temperance, municipal reform and better education would be more surely advanced when the finer virtues of women became a part of the political forces of the country.Our women in Chicago are now, for the first time, getting a taste of politics. By virtue of a recent act of wholesome generosity of our legislators, women are permitted to vote for trustees of the state university. Two women have been duly nominated on the republican and democratic tickets respectively for this office. Fortunately, the nominees are equally meritorious candidates. Although the offices to be filled are purely nonpartisan, our newly fledged suffragists are ranging themselves eagerly in the democratic and republican camps and are campaigning for their respective sides on purely party grounds. So far the campaign speeches and methods have not been elevated in the least degree above the dead level of partisanship. Our own women, too, have gone into the fight with a party zeal that would be satisfactory to the most exacting "boss." Without wishing to discredit the good motives of our women, or to criticise captiously their conduct in the campaign, I believe this new opportunity for self-help and advancement ought, not to be lost sight of in our thirst for public favors, or in our eagerness to help any grand old "party." We ought not to put ourselves in the humiliating position of being loved only for the votes we have. The sincerity of white women, who have heretofore so scorned our ambitions and held themselves aloof from us in all our struggles for advancement, should be, to a degree, questioned. It would be much more to our credit if we would seek, by all possible uses of our franchise, to force these ambitious women candidates and women party managers to relent their cruel opposition to our girls and women in the matter of employment and the enjoyment of civil privileges. We should never forget that the exclusion of colored women and girls from nearly all places of respectable employment is due mostly to the meanness of American women, and in every way that we can check this unkindness by the force of our franchise should be religiously done. If, however, we burden our hearts and minds solely with the anxiety for the success of a party ticket for party reasons, we shall be guilty of the same folly and neglect of self-interest that have made colored men for the past twenty years vote persistently more for the special interests of white men than for the peculiar interests of the colored race.There is no good reason why our women should not be made to feel sufficiently independent not only to make their peculiar interests a motive in the exercise of the franchise, but also to array themselves, when possible, on the side of the best, whether that best be inside or outside of party lines. Much more ought to be expected of colored women in 1894 in the exercise of their suffrage than was expected of the colored men who first voted under the 15th Amendment.It is now a good time in woman's clubs and organizations of all kinds for women to prepare themselves, by the best lessons of citizenship, to exert a wholesome influence in the politics of the future. The importance of the suffrage, as a means to complete emancipation from the impositions of prejudice should be eagerly taught, and brought home to the conscience of our women everywhere. It is more than probable that issues of immeasurable importance to the weal of our country, and requiring for their adjustment a larger amount of intelligent patriotism than has yet been exacted from the American conscience, will make demands on us by the time universal suffrage becomes one of the organic laws of the land.COLORADO.Elizabeth Piper EnsleyELIZABETH PIPER ENSLEY, EDITOR.What Equal Suffrage has done for Colorado.Among the many objections met with during our suffrage campaign, were that the best women would not vote, only the bad would exercise the right, and that women would not purify politics.None of these arguments have proven true. The best women have been the ones most interested. They have formed themselves into different clubs and are the indefatigable workers in the political party with which they affiliate.During the special canvas for registration it was found that only one out of twenty immoral women was willing to register. Since then they have been waited upon by our most corrupt politicians and urged to register and vote in order to defeat the bettterbetter class of voters. This call have no effect. The good women are in the majority.Before the opening, of the present political campaign the Equal Suffrage Association formed a Campaign for Good Government Committee with

auxiliaries throughout the state. This committee is composed of six women from each of the four political parties. They were divided into three committees; one, a press committee of sixteen to furnish articles relating to their work for every paper in the state; the other two consist of four members each, one for primaries, the other for conventions. The duty of the former was to urge all women to attend the primaries; that of the latter, to see that important resolutions were introduced into the conventions of all the parties.The first work of this committee was to draw up resolutions demanding that the age of consent be raised front sixteen to eighteen years, favoring the Initiative and Referendum, so successful in Switzerland, and that, resolving themselves into a committee of the whole, they use every effort to arouse public sentiment to the great need of civil service reform.These resolutions were passed by the E. S. A., and endorsed by all labor organizations, as well as by the women's clubs.The first successful result attained in the interest of good government will benefit a large number of people.Our city charter is a most intricate one. Some of the officials are appointed by the governor, some by the mayor, while others are elected by popular vote. Thus state, and therefore party politics, are brought into our city government.The present board of public works is composed of men of one party, while the boards of aldermen and supervisors are of two other parties.According to the charter the board of public works has the authority to employ labor for public improvements.During the great financial depression, when so many men were out of employment, it was suggested to the board of public works that it much needed sewer be built, thus giving work to hundreds of men having families dependent upon them--especially since three hundred thousand dollars of the city improvement appropriation remained in the bank.Those men began work late in August, but did not receive a cent, of money due them until the 16th of October, owing to the fact that the supervisors and aldermen refused to allow the warrants tendered the men to be cashed. They declared that the city charter did not sustain the board of public works in the carrying on of public improvements. This, too, in direct defiance of the decision rendered by the courts.As soon as the campaign for good government committee received an intimation of the existing state of affairs, a committee was appointed to wait upon the board of public works and ascertain the exact truth of the matter. From what the ladies learned, they believed the action to be dictated by a wholly partisan spirit, and therefore to be condemned.A mass indignation meeting was called. Our largest hall was packed. The women pleaded eloquently for the wronged, and a resolution was adopted providing for the payment of the Delgany Street sewer employees. After that the supervisors readily adopted the resolution. Only the concurrent vote of the aldermen was now needed to enable the treasurer to cash the warrants. A special meeting was called for that purpose at which the resolution was unanimously adopted. When the women crowded around the city clerk to get his approval many of the men to whom the money was due awaited in the lobby. It was a touching sight to witness their joy as they surrounded the women on their way out. They felt that it was all owing to the influence of these good women that their pay was not longer withheld from them.The women are among the most effective of the campaign speakers. All the political parties have acknowledged their worth and ability by nominating them on the several tickets as representatives to the legislature, superintendent of public instruction, and even as lieutenant governor. An ardent suffragist, whose work during the campaign brought her much in contact with the city officials, says that, in contrasting the deference paid to women now with the indifference then shown, she is constrained to exclaim: "Look here upon this picture, and on this."For the Investigation of Acts of Unlawful Violence.The Woman's Loyal Union of N.Y. and Brooklyn, are energetically pushing this petition to Congress for the enactment of the Blair Resolution. The Woman's Era Club of Boston will help on the good work by sending an independent one from New England.McKenzie, the optician, near the Infirmary on Charles street, examines your eyes and fits glasses. He is centrally situated for all club members, and always willing to give advice and information.MISSOURI.Josephine Silome YatesJOSEPHINE SILOME YATES, EDITOR.TO-DAY.Today, the princely child of yesterday,Emerges from the parent's regal brow,For action fully armed, in rich array,Like Pallas from the head of Zeus great.Apollo bows before his royal face,And floods of light dispersed o'er hill and vale.The land is bathed in majesty and graceBy him who sits, enthroned by right divine.How beautiful, in light and joyous mood,Art thou, O day but when thy god-like breastIs stirred by passion's dire and angry brood,Then terrible art thou with Wrath divine.And yet to make it year and sphere repay,The seer says all sorts of days it takes.Let us, therefore, rejoice in light today,Or, light denied, rejoice in life itself.For while we idly weep, or wish, or wait,The day declines; across the massive browA pallid shadow steals; we are too late!Behold the dying day is father of tomorrow.Modern Education as Influenced by the Reformation Three stages of intellectual development swept along with the reformation and were coincident with its progress.Humanism, grounded upon the study of the classics, came first as a natural result of the revival of learning; realism, or the education of the mind through the eye and hand, succeeded; while naturalism, or an attempt to develop first the body, then the character; lastly, the mind grew out of realism, and modern education is tacitly understood to be all unconscious compromise of these three aims.Humanism had gained something of a foothold in German universities by the middle of the fifteenth century, but the professors, although they waged continual war with the more ignorant and intolerant of the clergy, failed to see the greatness of the mother tongue as an instrument of culture; like the schoolmen they wrote solely in Latin, making no effort to fix the German language by unifying its dialects, and giving little or no attention to popular literature.The literature of an age expressed quite accurately the high-water mark of its education, and a glance at the history of this art in Germany, during the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries inclusive, is sufficient to reveal a great literary depression, the causes of which were numerous. It was it period of transitions in language, of religious disturbance, of discontent, among the masses, yet in a low stage of development.There was, however, a bright side to this dark picture,--a mental activity which was preparing the way for a higher development, not only of the entire German nation, but of all the nations influenced by its civilization; and while Luther was kindling the fires of the reformation by the publication of theses, sermons and tracts, the scholarly Erasmus and Von Hutten were writing, polished satires exposing the abuses of the Church, the vices of the clergy and the greed of monastic orders.Albert Durer, the greatest German painter of his time, was publishing treatises on art which have stood the test of the centuries; Paracelsus, in the German language, was lecturing on chemistry and medicine; later, Gerhardt and Fleming were writing poems which placed them in the front rank among lyrists.Dramatic art, encouraged both by Luther and the Jesuists, made considerable progress during the period of the reformation, although the plays were still coarse and offensive at a time when English audiences were appreciating the beauties of Shakespeare's masterpieces.Maximillian I. interested himself in popular literature to a certain extent, but his tastes inclined him more especially toward the court romances of early medieval days. In the teaching profession the humanists were still overshadowed by the schoolmen, the leading educators of the period, and they (the schoolmen) devoted themselves and their pupils to the most unprofitable questions of metaphysics and theology.The seven years' course of study, which represented the high aims of the best part of the middle ages, was a noble plan of education, but the church considered no form of knowledge as worthy of recognition which did not directly contribute to its aggrandizement, hence the course had been limited and formalized until only the husk remained. Methods of teaching had been corrupted, memory was substituted for thought. The renaissance, however, which appeared in Europe as the forerunner and a leading cause of the reformation, wrought a change in both subject and method. Pupils were now brought face to face

with Virgil and Horace, Plato and Cicero, and with classic models from all departments of art; but this great intellectual revival was not fully developed in Germany, when that religious movement invaded northern Europe which separated the culture of the reformation from that of the church; and we who are accustomed to look upon Protestantism as the key to independence and originality of thought, as an expression itself of the highest intelligence, can hardly realize the primary results of the separation, the loss in philosophic and artistic culture which the iconoclastic and insurrectionary spirit, attending the reformation in the early years of its development, occasioned in those countries most deeply affected by its onward march.Those who broke with the church had to create a philosophy, educational forms, and a culture of their own. As the mind, no longer in thraldom, for the church had assumed absolute control of the intellect, began to assert itself, the loss was more than sustained,--by the principles of Bacon, Des Cartes and Kant, by the discoveries of Galileo, Kepler, and Newton, and by the hosts of brilliant thinkers who, in spite of the warfare so long and so bitterly waged between science and religion, did originate and establish a new philosophy, a new education, a new culture.The instruction which Luther received in the Latin school at Mansfield, in the Francisan school at Madgeburg, the High School of Erfurt and lastly, in the Augustinian convent of Erfurt, was identical with the training of the age; Aristotelian philosophy, classics and theology forming the bulk of the course, and these subjects taught in a narrow and spiritless manner; but with this knowledge as a foundation Luther became the commanding spirit, no less in literature and education than in religion.The composition or poetry and music was a recreation in which he indulged during moments of leisure, yet who questions whether the soul of a poet ran through the thrilling lines of--"Ein feste Burg ist Iunser Gott,Ein gutes Wehr und Waffen;Er hilft uns frey ans aller Noth,Die uns jetzt hat betroffen, etc.Luther, generally speaking, cared little for the form of his composition as compared with the effect it produced, although his greatest literary achievement, the translation of the Bible into German, was attended by such simplicity of style and perfect comprehension of the numerous German dialects, that for the first time in the history of the Germanic people they possessed a common speech and to this Augustinian monk Germany owes the most essential of all the conditions of a truly national life and literature--a common vehicle of thought, intelligent and commanding.Education, previous to the reformation as conducted by Luther, was entirely under the control of the church; the church trained its children to fill the ranks of Catholicism, and Lather soon recognized that the success of his religious reforms depended largely upon the organization of schools for the people, in which the principles underlying his position might be taught, and thus popularized; and the study of the mother tongue through the German Bible, which, published in complete form in 1541, represented the work of the best years of his life, accompanied by the singing of those stirring hymns, contributed by Gerhardt, Luther, Fleming and others, was in itself a new education, and created a mutual interest in instruction and religion, in knowledge and faith.The reformer especially emphasized the value of the primary school, and so influenced the genius of modern education, by the methods which he advocated in that direction, that for three hundred years Protestant nations have moulded universal opinion in matters of primary instruction. He severely criticized the schools of the period, which were mainly designed for the favored few; complains of the brutality of the teachers, who, he says, "Behaved toward their pupils as if they were thieves." According to Luther's testimony, he, himself, was beaten fifteen times in one afternoon.Aiming at a practical solution of the difficulties surrounding the cause of popular education, in 1524, he addressed a forcible manifesto to the municipal authorities of all the German towns, appealing to the highest considerations of virtue and religion in behalf of public instruction. He would have the state support its schools on the same principle that it supports a standing army; he would make education compulsory, since military service is such, and for the former, the reasons are higher and stronger.The divorcement of education from the control of the church, and the public work, he found an able assistant in Melanchthon, who was a brilliant humanist, an influential teacher, and a successful writer of school books. Melanchthon's appointment in 1518 as professor of Greek in the University of Wittenberg marks an epoch of German university education. Scholastic methods of teaching were summarily dropped, Wittenberg became the national school, and from this time, the revival of letters, as influenced by the reformation, began to assert itself on German soil.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 8. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.FREE!Another Splendid Premium Offer!The first premium offered last March having been won the publishers of the ERA take pleasure in announcing another which, if possible, surpasses the first.READ!
FIRST PREMIUM.For the boy or girl, man or woman who in the next 3 months brings in the largest number of paid up subscribers (over one hundred in number) we will give a course in Mr. Eastman's School of Carving and Modelling.N.B.--This course taken at its full value is worth two hundred dollars; it extends over a term of nine months, and at the end of that time pupils are prepared to become teachers of the art. No more valuable premium could be offered; in return for a little energy a splendid trade is given and a position to teach almost assured, or if teaching is not preferred, and the premium winner prefers actual work, good and paying positions are assured.SECOND PREMIUM.To the one bringing in the next largest number of subscribers, half a term at the above school will be given.THIRD PREMIUM.To the one bringing in the third largest number of subscribers a New World Type-writer will be given.FOURTH PREMIUM.To the four boys or girls (beginners in music) bringing in each ten subscribers in the next three months, a year's course in the Boston Training School of Music will be given.Do not pass this over lightly. The WOMAN'S ERA makes a specialty of preparing openings for young colored people; it realizes the difficulties they encounter in obtaining such openings and is prepared to do well by ambitious, earnest and determined young people. Don't complain of lack of chances if you let such as these pass you by.All contestants not receiving premiums will be allowed twenty-five per cent on all paid yearly subscriptions received.The time allowed is short, but people who are in earnest act at once.For further particulars, addressTHE WOMAN'S ERA,
103 Charles Street, Boston.SCHOOL OF MODELLING AND CARVING.TEACHERS AND CRAFTSMEN TRAINED IN THE FOLLOWING INDUSTRIAL ARTS.MODELLING for Stone and Plaster.
MODELLING for metals. etc.
CASTING for Stucco and metals.
FIGURE CUTTING in Piece and Mould.
STONE CARVING, Buildings, monuments and Ecclesiastical Works.
WOOD CARVING, for Metals, Internal and External Decoration.
PUPILS PREPARED to teach the above in one term of nine months.
CRAFTSMEN PUSHED in special branches and situations secured upon completion of term; or work secured while studying.For terms apply to
CLAVENGER A. EASTMAN,
St. Augustine's Trade Schools,
Corner Cambridge and Grove Sts., Boston.GEORGE L. RUFFIN,
LESSONS IN SINGING.Lamperti Method.After October 1st,  103 Charles Street.Dates for Cecilia Wage Earner's Concerts, are Nov. 27, Jan. 16, Mar. 17, May 1.TICKETS, 25 and 15c.
Apply for Tickets one week before each Concert, at above address.Help In Choosing a School.The publishers of the WOMEN'S ERA will, on application of any of its subscribers, send catalogues and all informations easily obtainable, concerning any academy, college, normal, music, or art school in New England, on receipt of stamped and directed envelope. Address,WOMAN'S ERA, 103  Charles St.EDGAR P. BENJAMIN,Attorney and Counsellor-at-LawRoom 22,
34 SCHOOL STREET, BOSTON.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 8. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.- TRY -
A PERFECT ICING FOR YOUR CAKES,Will not spoil or foment in heat or cold, covered or exposed to the air.PERFECT ICING never dries out or crumbles, all other Icings draw the moisture from the cake and dry it up. A PERFECT ICING will keep your cake from drying out.PERFECT ICING should be put on in a very thin coating, like a varnish; it will give your cakes a beautiful gloss as well as flavor. Can be cut soon as put on by dipping your knive in cold water.A 25c. Jar of PERFECT ICING will go further than 25 cents in Egg and Sugar Icing as you use it, is more healthful, and gives a superior flavor.PERFECT ICINGS are put up in Screw Top Jars, also in Mason quarts, and in wooden pails of 25 lbs. each.DIRECTIONS.Remove the top, set the Jar in a moderate oven or warm place, until the contents are thin enough to spread. Take your knife, stir it up and spread on a cold cake, just as thin as possible. Set your jar away to use again.Ask your Grocer for PERFECT ICING.
Almond, Coffee, Wild Grape, Orange, Strawberry, Vanilla, Chocolate, Pistash.Prepared only by A.H. Peloubet & Co., New York.
See our Trade Mark A.H.P. is on every Label.PERFECT ICINGS used in making Sherbets or Water Ices, Ice Creams, Sauces, Home Confections, etc. Will give their rich flavors and save work.B.P. Ray, Agent. 2 Chatham Row, Boston, Mass.THE CELEBRATED
Witch-Hazel Velvet CreamDoes not contain corrosive sublimate, lead, arsenic, mercury, or any poison. As a toilet article for tan, sunburn, moth, freckles, etc., its excellence cannot be too well recommended.
Put up in 60c. and $1.00 Sizes, sent postpaid on receipt of Price. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE.For Sale by Druggists and Dealers in Toilet Supplies.All correspondence should be addressed to the New England Agents.W. F. & J. S. KINGSBERY
RANDOLPH, -     -   MASS. THE KRANICH & BACH PIANOSAgain took only Gold Medal at last Mechanical Fair for their unequalled patent Upright and Grands. Also Silver medal on Mehlin & Sons, and Stultz & Bauer Pianos. Also slightly used Steinway Grand for $400, Steinway Square $250, McPhail $190, nearly new Haynes Bros. Upright $325, new Ivers & Pond $225, H. F. Miller Parlor Grand $400, and fifty square Pianos from $50 to $200. Organs from $30 to $100.TERMS EASY.H. W. BERRY,646 Washington Street, -  BOSTON
Over Pray & Sons Carpet Store.Material furnished and a Stylish Walking or Visiting Dress made to order for $23.00, warranted to fit perfectly and finished in the best manner.Ladies can select material from any of the large dry goods houses, I will buy and be responsible for a handsome gown, at this extremely low figure.MRS. A.A. CASNEAU,Near Hammond St. 9 Greenwich St., Boston.ATTENTION LADIES.
Our Dress and Garment making is perfect; Prices reasonable; Fit, Style and Finish unsurpassed.
MILLINERY:
Hats and Bonnets made and Trimmed, 50c. to $1.00.
Our Millinery and Dress Cutting Schools are the best in the world. Young Ladies should come at once and learn.
HARVEY,  29 Temple Place, Boston.E.A. LIBBY,
New goods received by steamer every week. We never have an opening. 
Always ready to show goods.
-MILLINERY-
The old reliable house retains the same stand,
19 Temple Place, - -  Boston.H.B. McDERMOTT & CO.Dealers in and Manufacturers of
ALL KINDS OF WHALEBONE.
Dress and Corset Bone constantly on hand or
Made to order.Bone by the Ounce a Specialty.
673 Washington St., Boston
Opposite Beach Street.-THE-
NEW WORLD
TYPEWRITER.Price, $15.00
A useful and elegant present for ladies and gentlemen. Over 100,000 in use.
Perfectly simple, practical and durable.
No $100 machine can do better work.
Writes 77 characters. Capitals and small letters.
Never gets out of order. Perfect alignment always. 
No Instruction required. 
SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.
The Typewriter Improvement Co.
4 K Post Office Square, -  BOSTON, Mass.
Agents Wanted.DR. GEORGE LANG.Hair and Scalp Specialist,
28 Temple Place,
Boston, Mass.
Hours, 9 to 4. Rooms 6 and 7.50 DIFFERENT KINDS OF CANDY
AT 12c. Per Lb.
All others charge from 20c. to 40c. for the
Same Article.
J. W. ROBERTS,
578 Washington St., Cor. Hayward Place.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 8. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ALTANTAATLANTA, GA.
REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D. D. President.
THIS Institution trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedom of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions from those who are willing to help towards their education. Write to the President.BOSTON TRAINING SCHOOL OF MUSICINCORPORATED
Vocal and Instrumental Music,
Harmony, Theory and Composition.
Pupils thoroughly Prepared for Teaching and Public Performance.
Central Location. CATALOGUE FREE.
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M., Director,
Music Hall Building, Boston, Mass.A.G. McKenzie
OPTICIAN.
Artificial Eyes a Specialty.
156 CHARLES ST.,  BOSTON
Three Doors From Eye Infirmary.
TELEPHONE, 219-3 TREMONT.BOSTON
Condensed Milk Co.'s
Plain condensed (unsweetened) Milk Is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. Sold in jars at the office, 2 1/2 Park Sq., Boston. Delivered three times per week.
ENDORSEMENT.
I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak, puny baby into a strong, plump one, after all other foods had failed.
MRS. MCGILL.
10 Lindall Place, Boston.PRIVATE BOARD.MRS. ELIZABETH E. COOLEY will accommodate a few select boarders.
Transient or permanent,
AT 62 PHILLIPS ST., BOSTON.For Every Kind of PRINTING Go to
Chas. Alexander,
Publisher of THE MONTHLY REVIEW,
36 Columbus Avenue.  BOSTON.THE AMERICAN WRINGER CO.
Branch Store
13 & 15 BROADWAY EXTENSION. Boston, Mass.
Manufacturers of Clothes Wringers. 
All kinds of Wringers and Sweepers repaired.
Orders by mail promptly attended to.LESSONS BY MAIL.
Instructions in English Composition, Grammar, Use of Capitals, Punctuation, Formation of Sentences, etc. Address,
Miss M. W. GOULD, Box 165.  Readville, Mass.Robert L. Carter, M D. 
PHYSICIAN & SURGEON,
No. 722 Kempton Street,
NEW BEDFORD.
Diseases of Women a Specialty.
Telephone 329-4What is this
A.P.A. ?
What its Plans?
Who its Candidates?
What its Principles?
Where can we join?
For full information, send 2-ct. stamp for --or ask your newsdealer for--or send 50 cts. for 3 mos. trial subscription of--the paper which advocates straight A. P. A. principles--THE AMERICAN CITIZEN, 
7 Bromfield St., Boston.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 8. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.DO YOU WANT
TO OWN YOUR OWN HOME?
THEN READ THIS!IF YOU WANT TO BUY A HOUSE IN CAMBRIDGE, SOMERVILLE, DORCHESTER OR EVERETT . . .
IT WILL PAY YOU TO CALL ONBALDWIN & DORSEY, Real Estate, Mortgage and Insurance Brokers,They make a specialty of property in the suburbs.
They furnish purchase money at low rates of interest.
They will lend you money to build a house on your own land.Stop! Pay no more Rent!  Begin now to buy your own home!BALDWIN & DORSEY, 
Real Estate, Mortgages and Insurance,
555 MAIN STREET,  CAMBRIDGEPORT.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
OF BOSTON Street Railway Builders and Contractors for Public Works.ESTIMATES MADE FOR A COMPLETE UNDERGROUND SYSTEM.GEO. S. BARNES. President.
STANLEY RUFFIN, Sec'y and Treas.
34 School Street, Boston.BUTLER R. WILSON,
ATTORNEY and COUNSELLOR AT LAW,
NOTARY PUBLIC.
34 School Street, (Room 33)
BOSTON.D. A. NEWCOMB & SON,
DEALER in 
Fresh, Salt and Smoked Fish.
Fresh opened Oysters and Clams.
194 Cambridge St.,  Boston, Mass.
Orders called for and delivered promptly.Frank S. Murphy
Grocer.
61 Charles Street & Mt. Vernon St.
BOSTON, MASS.The Woman's Era.VOL. 1. NO. 9.BOSTON, MASS., DEC., 1894, PRICE 10 CENTS.THE WOMAN'S ERA.THE WOMAN'S ERA, the organ of the National Federation of Afro-American Women, and devoted to the Interests of the Women's Clubs, Leagues and Societies throughout the country.Published monthly, in Boston, by JOSEPHINE ST. P. RUFFIN, FLORIDA R. RIDLEY, Editors and Publishers, 103 Charles Street.SUBSCRIPTIONS.Per Annum, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -$1.00Single Copies, -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -.10Club Rates, one hundred copies,   -    7.00Subscriptions Payable in Advance.NEW DEPARTMENTS.Conducted by Mrs. W.E. Matthews, New York; Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, Washington; Mrs. Fannie Barrier Williams, Chicago; Mrs. J. Silome Yates, Kansas City; Elizabeth P. Ensley, Denver; Alice Ruth Moore, New Orleans.NOTES AND COMMENTS.An apology is due Miss Smith, and our readers that regular installment of "College Settlements" did not appear in the last issue. The matter, although set up and corrected, was left out for some of the peculiar reasons printers always have ready.What do you think of the ERA; is it not worth a dollar a year to you? Read what Mrs. Maples of Tennessee says about it. Oh, for ten thousand women like her! There are several million of us who really cannot afford to be without the paper, but if ten thousand would send its in it dollar apiece in the next twelve months we would he willing to send the paper gratis to a few of the many who are anxious to read it, but hesitate to subscribe for fear somebody will grow rich in consequence.We are pained to learn that there is a possibility of a discontinuance of Anno Domini's social notes after the opening of the new year. Anno Domini is a shy young thing who under the attention he has attracted to himself, begins to quail. If subscribers are of our mind, they will refuse to accept a resignation. Let us hear from you, friends. Shall Anno Domini be allowed to withdraw ? Address letters to this office."From the Virginia Plantation to the National Capitol," the autobiography of Hon. John M. Langston, superbly illustrated as it is, will make a significant and acceptable holiday gift. Read the announcement in these columns.So much of our paper is now given up to news from different sections, that much of local interest is crowded out. It is for want of space that we give so short a notice of the placing of a memorial tablet to Wendell Phillips on the building on Essex street, erected on the site of the house for forty years occupied by him.At the opening exercises of the Suffrage Fair, Monday evening, Dec. 3, (a full account of which is crowded out of this issue) after Miss Frances Willard's eloquent plea for the recognition of the rights of all human beings, Mrs. Ednah D. Cheney, who presided, took occasion to call attention to the gross violation of the principles of rights, which are supposed to govern all women's clubs, as exemplified in the action of the Chicago Women's Club in rejecting, a name offered for membership solely on account of color. Miss Willard replied that she was a member of the Chicago Women's Club, but as yet knew nothing about the matter complained of, but if, upon investigation, she finds that her club has, as reported, "rejected an able, refined, highly cultured woman solely on account of her color," then she, Miss Willard, will place her light face beside that darker one and walk out of the club with her. And the typical Boston audience applauded.The New York Tribune and Washington Post compliments Mrs. Mary Church Terrell and the ERA by publishing that lady's tribute to Miss Patterson in the November issue.The Christian Educator publishes letters from different colleges on the mental ability and moral standing of colored students attending the same. The only really hearty letter comes from Wellesley College, in which the only two colored grad-

uates are spoken of as young women of more than average ability and high moral character. By these two Miss Ella Smith and Dr. Rice are meant. Where does Miss Lowther come in? Statistics of this kind are of no earthly value. In this day and time no one is absolutely sure as to who is white. Color is a matter of chance, and what of the accuracy of statistics which put one child with one race and the other child of the same parents with another race!Among the new inventions that are destined to help make housekeeping easier and safer, is that of Fiber Carpet, made from a vegetable substance. It easily takes the most beautiful coloring, and while it resembles straw matting in looks, it has a compactness and it resistant quality, that, added to it freedom from odor, makes it far superior to that old-time favorite; tough, cleanly and pleasing to the eye, it fills a long-felt want for a sanitary carpet. Read the advertisement, and when you go down to see the tablet set into the building erected on the site of the old home of Wendell Phillips, go inside and see these beautiful floor coverings.Social_Notes.BOSTON.Boston is anticipating a small whirl of pleasure at Christmas time. Miss Marion Shadd of Washington will spend the holidays with Mr. and Mrs. B. R. Wilson of Rutland Square. Miss Ella Smith will be accompanied on a visit to her home at Newport by Messrs. George W. Cook and Wyatt Archer and possibly Miss Bessie Cook. After the Mary Street reunion, the whole party will probably take it trip to Boston.Miss Bessie Mitchell and Anna Wilson came up from New Bedford the latter part of October and made a flutter in the younger set. A Saturday night party at Mrs. J. H. Lewis', several theater parties and a host of callers combined towards giving the young ladies a "large" time.Mr. and Mrs. U.A. Ridley will be at home informally Sunday afternoons in December at 131 Kent St., Brookline.Miss Emma Ruffin, of Grove street, is recovering from her last and most serious attack of illness. She is now able to go out and will accompany her sister, Mrs. Paige, when the latter returns to Virginia.Although Mrs. Paige's call to Boston was a sudden and serious one, since the improvement in her sister's health she has been enabled to visit many of her old friends. Mrs. Paige is accompanied by her eldest son, Clifton.Miss Maud Cuney is travelling in Mexico. When last heard from she was at the Hotel Iturbide, Monterey, and enthusiastic over the beauties of the place, climate, etc. The party, which consists of Mrs. Cuney, Miss Cuney, Mr. Stephen Cuney and Mr. Ellis, are travelling especially for the health of Mrs. Cuney. They intend visiting most of the cities of Mexico, and as Mrs. Cuney's health is steadily improving, they are thoroughly enjoying every moment of the time.Theo, the youngest daughter of Dr. Grant, is most happily placed at boarding school. She is now an inmate of Mr. Allen's famous school at Newton. There is no training quite equal to that of a first class borading-school and the child who has the advantage of if is indeed fortunate. While Mr. Allen has always maintained the highest standard in his school and has been patronized by the first people of this and other countries, he has never made any sacrifices of principles to do this. From the first he has accepted colored pupils, has brought them into the home department, where they have associated on the closest terms with children of wealth and highest standing. The result has been that his school has prospered, and proved that it is best to do the right thing and the rest will take care of itself.NEW YORK.Victoria EarleVICTORIA EARLE, EDITOR.Everybody, that was approached directly concerning the November issue of the ERA, was enthusiastic in its praise. "A splendid number!" was echoed and re-echoed. A gentleman of large experience and fairly cultivated mind said, "Really, it is the finest thing in the way of a paper or journal the race has ever put forth, and should meet with instant Success. For my part, I am ready to say that if the women can do such things as that, the men ought to sell out, transfer their books, etc., over to the women, and a great change would come over us. Why the excellence of this edition will have its effect; it will stir the men to either shut up shop, or do better generally than they have done for the past twenty y"
               say, "When the new year comes in I

will subscribe." These things are very encouraging, but "A fair exchange is no robbery." If the masses want a good, clean, wholesome sheet, one that can be fittingly laid where it shall be available to every member of the family, from the youngest to the oldest, can be with pride placed on the circulating files in our libraries, can be offered, as exchanges, with the most favored journals, let them reflect over a few homely facts, that the burden of this venture makes justifiable and necessary.The women who edit this paper, without a single exception, do their work gratuitously. Because the people admire, but do not subscribe promptly--and in a cold, matter-of-fact, business manner, business principles should govern the subscribing for a paper, just the same as anything else worthy of support--the mental life of our people is not placed in a favorable light by a single strong annalist of today, and the only reason for a certain backwardness is the lack of that kind of support which would naturally lead to the fuller and more perfect development of our literary productions. Owing to the reputation that woman has for talking plain, particularly when there's none to talk hack, I confess I am taking the advantage, but a consciousness steals over me, imparting the thought that the ends sought after will constitute my apology.Beginning with the January issue, this column will be assisted by a splendid array of talent, among which may be mentioned with pride our sweet-voiced poetess, H. Cordelia Ray, whose gentle, retiring nature has kept her like a sweet little rivulet, ministering to those nearest, and dreading, with ever increasing strength, the gaze of this hurly-burly world of ours; whose one rule of living and judging is, I sometimes think, the one given in our school books for addition and subtraction.Another gentle woman, whose life is a synonym for the pure and wholesome; in literature, her writings teem with a love for the beautiful, a reverence for the good, and sympathetic encouragement for the struggles of all developing minds, a writer who instinctively lives the theory that while environment has much to do with mind cultivation, yet the individual holds the supreme power. It is the will to do, the will to be, that rules in the realm of mind culture. To know her teaches that there is such a thing as smiling, when a smile will uplift or cheer a fainting companion, even though a sepulchre is hidden deep down within the heart, sacred to the memory of joys of long ago, accounted sorrows now. I speak of her whose writings have long been a pleasure to a large circle here, known to the world as "Petite Reine."The versatile "Reintals," the grave and experienced "Watchman," and, as time goes on, others will contribute. I speak advisedly, for even now there is it movement on foot to establish a club, or circle of anonymous writers, which shall consist of a few choice spirits who will have as their object the success of real merit, unaided by accidental popularity, etc.--a good move. We can afford to rejoice over such a departure, because too much "noblesse oblige" is likely to sap originality and deferential independence of thought as well as speech.The Woman's Loyal Union was greatly encouraged by the news contained in last issue, as to the attitude of New England on the Blair Joint Resolution. If every section would take hold as the good New Englanders are doing, a petition would go to congress that would amaze not only ourselves, but the whole country. In the next issue of the ERA we will give a history of the movement from the beginning. Some people are inclined to see nothing practical in this petition the same people saw nothing practical in the petition for an investigation into the slums of large cities, nor the one calling for light as to tenement house construction, and the one which resulted in the exposure of the thousands of petty gambling dives. The results of these investigations have silenced all pessimists concerning them, and we predict the same conclusion when the Blair Joint Resolution shall be enacted and the committee regularly appointed, as was the illustrious Klu Klux Klan committee, before whom all facts concerning mob law shall be laid, and thereby given to the country at large. Then we will all see, as Mr. Blair has said, "The people having the unbiased facts, public opinion will see a remedy and enforce it." We rejoice to know that New England will send an independent petition to Congress. We wish other sections would do likwise, until every part of this great country shall have been heard from. The W. L. U. have in hand now returns from 14 states, and three hundred and fifty names from the Dominion of Canada.SOCIAL NEWS.NEW YORK.It is now quite decided that Mr. Charles Lansing will lead Miss Kate White to the altar on Christmas day. All society is looking forward to the event with a pleasant flutter of anticipation. It is expected that the affair will be a most elaborate one from every point of view. As the leading lady of Brooklyn, much is expected of her, so far as the wedding gown is concerned. I have it on good authority that it will be simply perfect. As usual, the church will be exquisitely festooned in honor of the Christmas celebration; that of itself will make it an ideal time for a marriage ceremony.Mr. Lansing owns a number of dwellings, but will take his bride to his homestead, to dwell with his father and mother, and it is said that the preparations going on there for the future mistress are elegant, bordering upon luxury.Leadership falls now to the winsome--but, oh, so whim-ful--Miss Katie Smith; or that delightful elf, Miss Mena Downing.  Strange how these things go. A little while back, and everything pointed to Miss Evangeline Walker, so far as leadership is concerned, but she is now tremendously interested in experimenting in the housewifely arts. Ah, well, such is life.Front all outward appearances, this season bids fair to be a most brilliant one, and it would be a delight to contemplate these things but for the decadence of old time manners and customs. Years ago, maidens were not considered stupid or dull who were shy and what some people call prim. They possessed a sweet prudishness that made one really feel that they were made up of tender blossoms and sparkling dewdrops. Oh, they were so bewitchingly dainty, so delightfully "skeery." I remember offering my arm to a delicate little creature once, during a lull in the music, and with the utmost nonchalance piloting her to an obscure corner. Never will I forget the indignant question that sprang into her eyes, as she divined--or thought she did--my meaning. But I came out ahead, as we always do. "Oh," I said, "I fancied I observed a door here leading to--supper!" See the point? The dear girls of today would prefer the quiet tete-a-tete to even the dance. Watch the floor and you'll find more married people dancing than any one else. And now that I come to think of it, that is the secret of the girls knowing how stupid the chappies are. They expect too much of them, because a fellow does not dare talk to more than one in a set--for the other girls will hear every word. It's hard, but the boys all have to play dude, and lisp: "Ah! I weally cawn't say, you know!" "Deah me! I've staid with you quite a twelfth, you know; perfectly ill bred, you know."It is rumored that Rob's chum, young Jackson, is fairly deluged with "Sunny-side" and "Climax," and the worst of it is, it is charged to poor Anno Domini. Come to think of it, there was something in last issue about the boy "eating his weed," or something like it. It's all in a lifetime.There's a most amusing story that savors a little of the old time "pig in the bag" series. One of the vestrymen introduced a minister as a lecturer to St. Philips Guild and he spent the hour admitting that Afro-Americans were much in the dark as to the employment of pure air, etc, To say that the house stood aghast, is to say but little.The Woman's Loyal Union started out to see if women stand by women any better than men do, or to put it more plainly, to see which is the most successful, the ones that depend upon man for a following, or the ones that count upon women first, last and always. I think the latter came in losers. I don't know for sure. At any rate, the W. L. U. gave an entertainment, and, while the most exclusive of New York and Brooklyn society life patronized the affair, yet there was room for many more.The hall was beautifully decorated with flags and potted plants, palms and fresh-cut chrysanthemums being most noticeable. Counsellor Stuart, in his usual hearty, brilliant manner, said a great many bright and sound things on that occasion that New Yorkers ought to remember. "These, women are aiming to accomplish a splendid work, a practical work--one that deserves the individual support of every man and woman anxious for genuine race development. The measure they are working for has within its scope the refutation of the vile slanders against its as a humane moral people."The Hon. John S. Durham followed, and made a strong point by asking, "Will the people sympathize with so grave an undertaking?" He complimented the women by saying their methods appealed to reason, and not sentiment mainly, and were bound to succeed in the end."The leader of this courageous body, the sad-eyed "Victoria Earle," was called "Anno Domini, '94," in my presence, too. Thanks awfully for the compliment. Speaking of the president of the powerful W. L. U., several have noticed that she wears invariably a pair of hearts at her throat, and a tiny blue one on the index finger of the left hand. I wonder why.As usual, Harry Burleigh was the lion of the occasion. He sang, in the absence of a member, with the Guild Quartette, and later charmed the house with two of his favorite numbers. And while such as "our Rob and his chums," Messrs. Attwell, Day, Peterson, Charleton, Durham, Grazette, Thomas, and such old veterans as W. Russell Johnson, Tom McKeel, Dorsey Webster, and a whole host were dancing, Harry B. was chatting with one of the sweetest girls in the lot--and there were so many lovely creatures out that night! One, a very interesting looking widow, was the cynosure of all eyes.Mrs. Matthews, our "Victoria Earle," upon whom I shall, in all probability, make an ERA New Year's call, possibly confess, etc., etc., has the reputation of being one of the most enthusiastic women in town, earnest, and to a remarkable degree, a believer in her own sex, and a woman destined to succeed in what she sets out to do. She's a credit to her sex, and the Queen Bee in our town. She has stirred our best women as no other woman has done, in my time, at least. It was a fitting compliment to her as a woman that such women as Mrs. S. J. S. Garnet, Mrs. C. A. Attwell, Mrs. F. H. Carmand, Mrs. J. Pegram Williams, Mrs. Jerome B. Peterson, Miss Annie L. Dias, Mrs. E. Dorsey, Mrs. Broughton, Miss Edie Braxton, Miss Katie White, Mrs. A. D. Lee, Mrs. Beauvere, Mrs. Richards, Mrs. Jarrot, Mrs. J. E. Garner, Mrs. J. S. Poline, Mrs. Maxwell and Mrs. A. Rich gathered around her.The King's Daughter's "Willing Workers" Circle, Mrs. White, president, are practising a drama, to be given some time before Easter. To this circle belongs the honor, I understand, of placing the first colored woman in the management of Brooklyn Colored Home. Mrs. Anna Rich, a sister of "Victoria Earle."The St. Mark boys are planning a great surprise for the Guild lads. They are secretly drilling a quartette to throw into the shade Messrs. Attwell, Jackson, Williams and Medocer. Harry Burleigh has been mentioned as a possible instructor.His charming little pupil, Miss Lavinia Jones, was in splendid voice at the W. L. U. concert. She did very well--looked real cute standing 'mid the palms; so did bewitching Miss Sadie Evans, all bedecked in rare old lace and cream white satin. She is the merriest girl I know. She was very saucy toANNO DOMINI 1894.WASHINGTON.Mary Church TerrellMARY CHURCH TERRELL, EDITOR.Miss Jennie Hilyer, sister of Mr. A. F. Hilyer, one of the most useful and popular citizens with whom Washington is blessed, has been called from Provident Hospital, Chicago, to take charge of the nurses in the surgical department of Freedman's Hospital.Musical Washington now carols paeans of rejoicing  because Mrs. Alice Strange Davis has returned to her former home and has again taken up her residence among us. Baltimore has our heartfelt sympathy at the loss of such an artist as Mrs. Davis.The social festivities of the season were inaugurated by a reception recently given by Mrs. A. F. Hilyer, whose assistants were Mesdames Lawson, Davis, Williams, Terrell, and Misses Mickie Cook, Bessie Cook, Essie Tucker and Annie Wilder. The costumes of the ladies, the delicacies served by such charming young women, and the amiability of the hostess, all went to make the occasion enjoyable in the extreme.About thirty young women are availing themselves of a course in nursing which Freedman's Hospital now offers. They are obliged to remain in the hospital eighteen months before receiving a diploma. Two hours a day they are off duty and about once in two weeks have a whole afternoon to themselves. Besides enjoying the benefit received from actual experience in nursing the sick, they are permitted to assist at the clinics, where much valuable information is acquired. In addition to giving instruction free of charge, the authorities pay the nurses a small sum monthly for their services. With such an opportunity and with such encouragement, it is no wonder that so many of our women are choosing the avocation for which they are by nature so admirably fitted. In deciding to become a professional nurse a young

woman not only selects a calling which is both dignified and lucrative, but one which calls forth all those virtues essential to the highest and best womanhood."Why do the Washington schoolmarms look so young?" asked a gentleman from a neighboring city not many moons ago. It would have been impossible to reply had a suitable answer been on the tongue's end. Without waiting for any solution of this interesting problem in ethnological physiognomy, our friend went into one series of paroxysms after another over the youthful appearance, the charming manners, the amiable disposition and the fetching costumes of the typical Washington schoolmarm. He insisted that the older they grow, the younger and more charming they become, and he was a man of good judgment and excellent taste.When it was possible to get a word in edgewise, a thoughtful friend, noted for his penetration, ventured to solve the mystery of our schoolmarm's eternal youth and beauty as follows: "Our teacher's work is lighter than anywhere else in the country, thanks to our school system, which is about as near perfection as a human institution can hope to be. Outside the schoolroom the teacher is not overburdened with work, although nowhere in the country are teachers more solicitous for their pupils' welfare and more punctilious about their duties to them. The Washington schoolmarm is not harassed by the divers vexations of spirit to which many of her unfortunate sisters are elsewhere subjected. For instance, her position in the schools is secure as long as she deports herself properly, and she knows it. She is, therefore, not obliged to pull wires and 'crook the pregnant hinges of the knee' to retain it, a rule which, I regret to state, does not pertain everywhere. When there is the inclination, she can attend a lecture, hear an opera, go to the theatre, or divert herself in the variety of ways for which the Nation's Capital is famous. Besides, our teachers are well paid; can, therefore, afford to take good care of themselves and dress well. No wonder we have the most charming schoolmarms in the world," said their able champion and logician. Drawing himself up with pride and glowing with enthusiasm, as though he were individually responsible for the delightful condition of affairs on which he had expatiated with such evident satisfaction and knowledge.The Colorado women came nobly to the rescue of the republican party in the last election. This is a fair sample of what women will do for the country when they are no longer put on the level with idiots and criminals. Wyoming and Colorado are the only states advanced, and just enough to permit all of her citizens to vote at state elections without regard to sex.It is safe to predict that a few years hence it will be difficult for colored women to find employment here as cooks or housekeepers. Public sentiment is waxing so strong against them that unless a change sets in their favor, comparatively few will be able in the future to find employment as servants. A glance at the advertising columns of the daily papers, in which the demand for white help is so explicit and great, is sufficient to convince one that the situation here for women laborers of the race is becoming very serious. It is the fad now for the wealthier classes to employ skilled cooks, to whom they pay large prices, and these skilled cooks are almost without exception white. In the south, where colored help has always been preferred, even when white help was just as available and serviceable, it is growing quite common to employ white servants to the exclusion of the colored.There is constant friction between the employed and the employer all over the country and along all lines, regardless of race or sex, but the loudest complaint here at present is directed against colored domestics. This is one of the most, serious problems that confronts us, since the women wage-earners of the race contribute as much at least to its support as the men, and when the women fail to find employment in domestic service many a family will suffer and much of the revenue enjoyed will be cut off.In view of the fact that white help is supplanting the colored, is it not sensible and charitable for the thoughtful men and women of the race to attempt to devise ways and means of improving this alarming condition of affairs? Since clubs and societies are formed to further all sorts of interests and projects, why not organize a society, the duty of whose members will be to meet the laboring classes, and impress upon them the necessity of making themselves skilled workmen in every sense of the word? There is a society here, headed by Mrs. Logan and other prominent women, whose object is the improvement of do-

mestics. They teach the girls and women bow to perform their duties skilfully and systematically, so as to lighten their labor and make their services more desirable and indispensable to those who employ them. Is it not possible for the thinking women among us to establish schools in which our girls may be educated to be first-class servants? It is a work in which those who have the welfare of the laboring classes at heart must soon engage. Obliged to combat a bitter, unreasonable prejudice, the working colored women of the future must be well equipped and reliable indeed to stem the tide of disfavor which has set against them, here at least."What are you doing with yourself these days?" asked one well-known woman of another. "Well, I'm taking a course in English literature and dabbling a little into the history of Russia. Since the death of the czar has turned the attention of the world to his interesting country, it has suddenly dawned upon me that I am absolutely ignorant of its present government, the habits of its people, and its past history." "Taking a course in English literature and studying Russian history!" exclaimed her friend in amazement. "What becomes of your house, your children and your sewing? I've neither chick nor child, and I haven't one minute to spare after the monotonous household affairs have been dispatched. From morning till night I am equipped with a kitchen utensil, a broom or a dust-cloth, and if, by some lucky chance, I can conscientiously lay them aside, in comes a friend or an acquaintance, and away go plans and time for mental improvement. I am just like everyone else and find it impossible to get good help, so that I have about as much time to study when I do my own work as I do when I have a hindering assistant. There is no one in the house except my husband and myself, the work is light, but by the time the little things have been attended to I am either too tired or too worried to study. Now you have a house full of children, do most of your sewing, and are a perfect model of a housekeeper, with no better help than I have. How in the world do you find time for English literature and Russian history?"How I manage to save a few minutes for mental improvement is not difficult to explain," replied the friend. "I have a certain time in which to do my various duties. In other words, I systematize my work, for in the long run it is much more satisfactory to map out a schedule of work and go by it, though the heavens fall, than to attack things 'a la haphazard.' It may secin a. little like self-imposed servitude and self-tyranny at first, but the good results soon justify its adoption. Just try a schedule once, and then revert to the old go-as-you-please method of doing a duty today, if you feel like it, leaving it alone if you don't, consuming one hour to accomplish something today which will require three hours tomorrow, and thus getting yourself wound up in a knot of unfinished duties tangled with those that are to come, and you will soon see the folly of this desultory, slip-shod way of doing business. But you asked me how I found time to meddle with the affairs of the Russians and attend to my own business as well. I simply arrange my work so as to leave a certain amount of time for study, and whether I feel like it or not I go at it religiously, unless I am positively ill.""What do you do if you are interrupted by visitors? " "That is the most serious difficulty which confronts me and the only kind of interruption against which I can make no provision. In the first place, I usually set apart for study that time in the morning or afternoon when visitors rarely come, but if they do I accept the inevitable and promise to make up for lost time as soon as possible.""By the way, did you ever think how much time would be saved if we did not run in upon our friends at all sorts of unseasonable hours, just because it suited our convenience? Men will not entertain callers in business hours. If a friend comes in whom they are really glad to see, they greet him cordially, pass the time of day, and excuse themselves on the plea of pressing business matters. No offence is meant and none is taken. What a blessing it would be if we women could understand each other so thoroughly. So often have I heard my friends bemoaning their fate, because the day set apart for doing some special work was hopelessly destroyed by unreasonable though not unwelcome visitors.""Don't you enjoy the visits of your friends?" asked her companion, considerably piqued and disconcerted by the conversation on unreasonable visits. "Certainly I do," was the reply. "No one enjoys visiting and being visited by friends more than I do; I only plead for seasonable visits and a little insight or tact to discern when it is right to consume a friend's time and when it is kind to leave her alone. Personally, I have noth-

ing to complain of, as I am rarely prevented from doing my duty by visitors, and expect to find in the future, as I have in the past, time to brush the cobwebs from my brain if I cannot luxuriously furnish it with a multitude and variety of facts."REMINISCENCES.Defending a Fugitive.Thomas B. HiltonBY THOMAS B. HILTON.There are many now living that distinctly remember Constable Reed, and also remember him as a man of good courage, but a little inclined to be too officious and domineering. It was Reed who was selected to go to California and bring back a noted desperado, in which case he showed it great deal of intrepidity and bravery.  It was Reed who came to arrest Big Dick, but the latter took him and carried him to the Court House, much to his mortification, at the same time surrendering himself. Reed, however, in his later years, has been heard to refer good-naturedly to this episode.It, was generally conceded that whatever he set out to do was generally done, even to the capture of a poor fugitive slave. It has been said, however, by those who knew him best, that he was not prejudiced against the colored people, and that, under the same circumstances, he would capture a white man equally as quick.But it was an attempt on his part to capture one of the former that we are about to relate.On the very spot where the Twelfth Baptist Church now stands, and the adjacent territory, extending in a northeasterly direction and bounded on three sides by the rear walls of brick houses, was a settlement consisting of dingy, shabby looking houses, most of which were known as "ten-footers," that were scattered promiscuously over the entire area. There was no recognized passage through this region, but a way known as "Black Dog Alley " (a name given it on account of the numerous curs, in reality of all colors, that infested the place, and by which the stranger, whom they seemed to instinctively know, was sure to be beset upon entrance and determinedly followed till his return and exit), which windings were understood only by those familiar with the locality, was the sole avenue. Neither was this habitation lighted by night, and one having occasion to be within its borders after nightfall might imagine himself in some part of Pluto's dark realm. In fact, the whole appearance of the place was as uninviting as it was irregular, and one in which people generally never cared to venture too far, either by day or night.It was in one of those dark, sunburnt-looking hovels that the incident occurred to which we are about to allude.It seemed to be suspected by Reed's movements that he was after a fugitive slave who had come to Boston and was known to be stopping somewhere in that part of the West End to which reference has been made; and their surmises proved to be well founded, for the fugitive had been tracked to Boston, and it was given into Reed's hands to find and arrest him. He seemed to have been successful in gaining a knowledge of his whereabouts and no doubt thought he was sure of securing his victim.One day that officer appeared before one of those hovels before described and demanded admission. But a voice from within demanded the immediate withdrawal of the officer, as he could rest assured that the door would not be opened. This only incensed the latter, who threatened to burst open the door if his demand was not immediately complied with; but in turn was warned by the same voice that if his threat was carried out he would be sure to regret it. This only increased the anger of the intruding officer, who, sure enough, commenced to use his legs and feet as battering rams, and being stout and rugged it was not long before the wood-work around the lock began to weaken, and soon breaking away, the door swung upon its hinges, and Reed started to enter, but suddenly halted, for before him stood a ferocious-looking colored man armed with an ax, which he poised in his hands, who, in fierce tones told the officer that if he stepped his foot inside the door his head would be severed from his body. As we have said, Reed hesitated , for the look of unmistakable meaning in the eyes of the colored man seemed to bring him to his senses and to a realizing sense of the situation. He felt in his heart that there was danger, but he had come there to arrest a fugitive slave that had there found a shelter, and yet he shrank from the undertaking. But should he retreat? It was no doubt when this thought came to his mind that Reed's courage and determination came back. Such a thing should never be said, for if so, his reputation was gone forever. And seeming either to determine within himself that he would not believe that the man would dare after all to carry out his threat, or that he might successfully cope with him (for Reed was no coward), he made a move-

ment to take the forbidden step. But if this was his reasoning, and such it evidently seemed to be, it proved a poor reed to lean upon; for, quick as lightning, the ax was swung aloft, flashed as it turned in air, and came down. The head was gone; but not by decapitation, for Reed saw the movement and dodged quick enough to save his head and his life also. But he was not to go unscathed, for the keen blade of the ax struck the fleshy part of the arm near the shoulder, which he had raised for protection, inflicting a severe flesh wound, and found a lodgment in the frame of the door. As quick as before, the ax was again uplifted, as if this time to make sure his aim. But Reed had had enough of such experience, and with a quickness for which he had never been accredited, he had eluded the descending blow and was well outside of the door, and standing at a respectful distance began to vow vengeance on his would be headsman; he finally went away declaring that he would return and arrest them both. In due time, a warrant was indeed served upon the colored man who, now that the fugitive had made his escape (who, while the scene at the door was being enacted, had, with the aid of the defender's wife got out of the house by a back window and been conducted to a place of safety) readily and without resistance gave himself up, and the next morning was arraigned before the court. But upon examination it was found that Reed had unlawfully proceeded without a warrant, and the Judge, taking the ground that a man's house was his castle and that the colored man was justified in doing as he did under the circumstances, and considering, perhaps, that Reed needed a lesson on the unlawful exercise of authority, the man was acquitted.The circumstances and trial of this case were published in the Boston newspapers and are still remembered by a number among us. One old gentleman, doing business in Boston some years ago, told the writer that he knew of the affair soon after its occurrence, and distinctly remembers reading the account of the trial in his paper, The Times, the next day.From the Virginia Baptist.We have received the enlarged edition of the WOMAN'S ERA, a monthly published at Boston, Mass., with Josephine St. P. Ruffin and Florida R. Ridley, editors. It is certainly a magnificent publication. It has 20 pages of excellently printed and splendid reading matter on good book paper. Several new departments have been added, conducted by Mrs. W. E. Matthews, New York; Mrs. Mary Church Terrell, Washington; Mrs. Fannie Barrier Williams, Chicago; Mrs. J. Silome Yates, Kansas City, Mo.; Elizabeth P. Ensley, Denver, Col., and Alice Ruth Moore, New Orleans. It is devoted to the interest of the women's clubs, leagues and societies throughout the country. The present number contains an article on "Cedar Hill and Its Master," which is indeed a masterpiece of word-painting. It is signed "Victoria Earle." It is certainly a magnificent sheet. Only one thing, fair editresses, give us a Virginia page, with Mrs. Rosa D. Dowser of this city in charge."We would gladly have a Virginia page. Hampton, Norfolk and surrounding towns were among the first to send in subscriptions and endorsements in any number. The ERA owes much to the intelligent interest of Mrs. R. G. L. Paige, Mrs. Geo. J. Davis and other ladies of eastern Virginia.Memorial to Wendell Phillips.Few places in America have more history connected with them than Boston. More than this, history is continually being made here. Unfortunately, the growth of the city demands the demolition, partial or total, of many of the landmarks and historical spots, and in many instances the changes are such that tablets are the only things that mark the spots.It is a pity that, with the new Boston spreading in all directions, old Boston cannot be left intact. The old house on Essex street, in which Wendell Phillips lived for forty years, has succumbed to the business demands of the city, and that the associations connected with the Spot might not wholly be forgotten, and as a memorial to Boston's famous son and great orator, a tablet to the memory of Wendell Phillips was placed upon the building, with fitting exercises, on Nov. 20. Among those who spoke were William Lloyd Garrison, Rev. C. G. Ames, Ex-mayor Green, Clement G. Morgan and Julius C. Chappelle.Owing to the threatening weather and the understanding that the exercises would take place in the open air, few ladies were present. So when Mr. Garrison called for some woman to speak, unfortunately there was no response, and this opportunity for the women to pay tribute to the staunch friend and advocate of the rights of both sexes and all races was lost.ADVERTISE IN THE WOMAN'S ERATHE ONLY PAPER IN AMERICA PUBLISHED IN THE INTEREST OF WOMEN'S CLUBS.The WOMAN'S ERA, as the organ of the colored women's clubs, has a large circulation in many of the large cities, notably Boston, New Bedford, Providence, New York, Chicago, Washington and Kansas City.The Literary, Musical, and Domestic Departments are under the control of competent writers and critics.With its large circulation among women, and particularly among women of the refined and educated classes, it offers peculiar advantages to advertisers of household articles, wearing apparel, books, magazines, musical instruments, and so forth.Its rates are exceedingly liberal.Try it, and you will not regret it.EDITORIAL.Two candidates for school committee were presented by the colored people of Boston for nomination by the Republican party, neither one of whom was accepted, --Dr. George F. Grant and Mr. G. W. Forbes. The failure is to be regretted. An able, wide-awake representative on the school board is our due and means more than appears at first blush. In presenting a candidate colored men should not be indifferent to the women voters; they hold it tremendous power over school matters. By the way, the papers, in referring to Dr. Grant, speak of him as having been born in the South; according to our understanding Dr. Grant was born in New York State, where the home of his father was one of the well-known stations of the under-ground railway.It is enough to make one's blood boil and to keep one in it perpetual fighting mood to see not only how law and justice are violated, but rules of honor and courtesy perverted by Caucasians in dealing with the negro. "You call yourself a Christian, and sell a house in a first-class neighborhood to colored people." This is the reproach of an estimable Brooklyn lady!"You a Harvard graduate and an instructor and do a thing like this!" said an indignant white man to a fellow when he found that his house had been sold to colored people.Not only are colored people to be kept out of all desirable trades, employments, homes and business places, but anyone who assists the poor wretch to anything desirable is to be denounced.The difficulty which colored people experience in obtaining property in Boston is an astonishing revelation to outsiders. Houses are put upon the market with the almost universal instruction, "Under no consideration to be sold to darkies." Occasionally there are individuals anxious to realize money who will sell at a great advance to colored people; then, too, when nobody else will buy colored people will be welcomed.The position is absurd. No other class of venders say who shall and shall not buy their wares. A real estate agent advertises for a purchaser, does not intimate that anything is necessary but the requisite amount of cash and then reserves to himself the right to refuse and perhaps insult a colored man if he chance to apply. However, people get what they want, a fact which sellers of houses will begin to realize by-and-by; in the meantime, don't let them in their blind anger put things in a wrong light. A Christian and a gentleman, a Harvard graduate and instructor can do such a thing as sell a house to colored people without any loss to honor or discredit to their standing. On the contrary, the discredit is with any Christian or gentleman or Harvard graduate who draws the line simply because of color.Hon. Robert Treat Paine has recently been reading a paper on the causes and preventatives of poverty and pauperism. This gentleman has made a reputation of his own for charitable work. He looks at charitable work philosopicallyphilosophically and gives it much thought and time. He is deeply interested in the prevention of pauperism, believes in the elevation of the home life, providing clean, cheap and healthy tenements for the poor. He is prime mover in building associations by which poor men are enabled to get in possession of comfortable and pretty homes by easy payments. In his work the honorable gentleman talks much about "the poor," but do not be misled, he means the "white poor" or the "poor whites." He builds hundreds of houses, which are intended as godsends for poor men, and then closes them irrevocably to any poor colored men who may apply. The poor white working men

must have their prejudices catered to. They are poor, it is true, but they must not be made to suffer the humiliation of living beside a colored man, even though he be respectable.Treat Paine stands high in the church, high in charitable works, and yet he likes such a position as this, a position which is both cowardly and dishonorable.Public men must be prepared for public criticism, and if there be followers of this gentleman who think he is making a record as a beneficent Christian, it is just as well for them to know there are others who think differently.Colored people get much abuse because they take much. It is time for them to strike back and use their journals for that purpose. If we must "kick" let us kick to some purpose and where it will be felt.MISSOURI.Josephine Silome YatesJOSEPHINE SILOME YATES, EDITOR.Modern Education as Influenced by the Reformation.CONCLUDED.Although Luther placed such stress upon a German translation of the Bible, he did not think it wise at that time to take the more aggressive step of introducing German into the new schools. He recommends mathematics and the study of nature, while he does not consider either as all-essential. His mission is for history and the historians, and for music, which he considers a civilizing influence and conducive to that joyousness, and abundance of which he so much approves in the school room.We find the germ of the graded school in his divisions, and of the normal school in his plan of keeping the best of the pupils for a longer time at school. To them he gives special instructors, and opens libraries for their use. Favorably inclined toward the higher education of women and the co-education of the sexes, Luther apparently anticipated at least two of the snags and scarecrows of modern education, and disposed of them with a liberality of sentiment which would have done credit to a reformer of the nineteenth century.The influence of his favorite master, the humanist, Trutivettie, and of Tauler, the mystic, are trace able in his educational and religious beliefs. His own efforts toward the materialization of ideals rapidly gained the attention of the public, but the interruption occasioned by the Thirty Years' War, his own death in 1546, and other events before and after, incident to the Reformation, made it impossible for him to directly impress his personality upon the schools of his time.Luther, Melanchthon and Erasmus formulated theories for Protestant education, while others, as the brilliant Sturm of Strasburg, put them to practical use.Living between the years 1550 and 1589, all enthusiastic humanist, Sturm's work was especially along the line of higher education. In his course of ten, or at the least, nine years, seven were to be spent in acquiring pure idiomatic Latin, and the remainder in the acquisition of an elegant Latin style. As rector of the Strasburg high school for a period of forty-five years, during which time thousands of pupils passed under his instruction, and from nearly every European country, he, more than Luther or Melanchthon, moulded the form of Protestant schools, directed the educational thought of the times, and developed the scheme upon which the great classical schools of England and other Protestant countries were based. Thus it was that Cicero to such an extent moulded the character and conduct of an English statesman, who felt that "A false quantity in a Latin quotation was really a greater crime than a slip in logical argument."Erasmus, the scholar of the Reformation, exerted a most salutory effect upon the educational spirit of the age by calling the attention of teachers to the amenities of polite society, and to attractive methods of producing culture in the pupil.Take in its entirely, humanism, as taught in the Protestant schools, if narrow, was not a poor equipment for active life. William Pitt, at twenty-two chancellor of the exchequer, at twenty-four prime minister of England, was a product of this method of training; but it is said of Pitt upon authority, that he was not only a first-rate humanist, but also "An excellent mathematician, a keen observer, an admirable orator, a close reasoner, a profound student or history, and a political economist far in advance of his times.In the history of popular education, as influenced by the Reformation, it is important to realize the existence of two parallel streams of thought, the religious idea, or Hebraism, as embodied in Luther, the purely educational, or Hellenism, as fairly represented by Erasmus. The

religious feature, as imposed by Luther, we still find, to a greater or less extent, in our denominational schools and in such public schools as still retain some form of religious exercise. If there are but two great elements in our modern civilization, Hebraism and Hellenism, it is safe to state that the Reformation has indelibly stamped the general principles of the former upon our educational systems; while the whole tendency of modern civilization toward Hellenism is so overmastering that there is little danger of its being over-shadowed.Neither can the influence of the early Protestant schools be accurately estimated without sounding the depths of that great counter-current, which was rapidly thrown into prominence and used by the opponents of the reform measures to serve the double purpose of stemming the tide of the Revolution, either by the conquest of new provinces for the church, through missions, or by preserving the old through the control of the church.Organized by Loyola, the Society of Jesus was formally consecrated by Paul IV. in 1540, and grew with such rapidity that by 1710, the Jesuits controlled 612 colleges and it large number of universities. Upon its roll of honor were found some of the most illustrious names of the period--Bossuet, Des Cartes and Moliere. Voltaire received his training from the Jesuits, but he says of them, "They taught me nothing but Latin and nonsense."Authorities differ as to the educational value of the Jesuit schools. Bacon and Des Cartes sincerely believed in their superiority. Leibuitz regarded them as below mediocrity, but in spite of adverse opinion, they maintained an educational supremacy until the end of the eighteenth century, and according to the Brittanica, represent in America today a large percentage of the whole number of educational institutions, both in the United States and Canada.Unlike the Protestant reformers, the Jesuits ignored primary instruction, and thus far no exposition of the principles underlying their method of instruction have been found. Like the humanists, and to a still greater extent, they reverenced the study of Latin, and covered their districts with Latin schools. They appealed to the memory as the basis upon which to found their system; and the sole merit of their teachers, as seen through the experience of the centuries, seems to have been the stamp of aestheticism which they fixed upon modern education and their ingenious attempts, for whatever purpose, to individualize their pupils. In our own system, we have not yet decided whether it is better to turn out job-lot mediocrity or to individualize or specialize.The Jansenists, rivals of the Jesuits, possessed whatever of merit there may have been in the latter, and, in addition, sought to introduce the study of the mother tongue, the training of the reason and judgment. Looked upon with disfavor, their schools were soon suppressed by the Jesuits; but the contest for supremacy, which, from the initial point, began to be waged in those countries where Catholicism and Protestantism co-exist, still continues, assuming various phases, according to the political and religious character of the country in question, and universally affecting civilization to a far greater extent than can be estimated by the casual observer.Thus has the humanistic system of Protestant education, as originated by Luther, been limited in extent, and otherwise changed by the influence of the streams that have impregnated it. Humanism itself, training the pupil more especially for school than for life, gradually gave place to that realism and naturalism that necessarily follow in the wake of utilitarian ideas and today form the most important features of our educational system.Naturalism in Germany was ably fostered by Ratich and Comenius, and both were largely influenced by the Lutheran movement. Ratich defined a few valuable pedagogical laws and endeavored to establish the mother tongue as a part of the curriculum; but it was Comenius who determined that gradation of schools which forms the basis of modern instruction, who not only defined laws in the art of teaching which are still in use, but also substituted the knowledge of things for the study of Greek and Latin roots, and thus produced a race of original investigators. The mother-school of Comenius prepared the way for Frbel and the kindergarten, while from his plan of nature study, we develop the science lessons of primary and elementary schools. Thus at every step we find modern education linked with the genius of the Reformation.Compayre writes in his "History of Pedagogy," "Every system of philosophy contains in germ a special system of education." Yes, and it is no less true that the destiny of the human race is controlled by educational forces extending backward to the creation of the universe, onward

and onward in ever-widening circles, through unknown evolutions, into infinity. Environed today more closely by the philosophic circles of Bacon, Des Cartes and Kant than by the principles of Luther's methods, we feel the force of at greater scope of horizon and call it the "new education," but the unprejudiced mind will freely admit that its data were made possible of conception, of interpretation, of realization because of that spirit of absolute intellectual freedom which the processes of the Reformation contributed to modern civilization.Volume I., No. 8, of the WOMAN'S ERA has reached our office. We were particularly struck with its admirable makeup and scholarly articles and trust that it has come to stay. The editors are ladies of culture and refinement worthy representatives of their race. The ERA should meet with great success among our people.--Kansas City Messenger.Mrs. Carrie Dearborn of Boston has completed a very successful course of lectures on cooking in connection with the Pure Food Exhibit at the Third Regiment Armory, corner of Twelfth and Troost.The Married Women's Club of Kansas City, Kansas, is doing excellent work.Lovers of higher literary criticism should not fail to read Frederic Harrison's articles in the Forum. Among the great writers thus far subjected to his keen analytical processes may be found Carlyle, Macauley, Thackeray, and others.The Greenwood Literary and Philosophical Club, founded by and named in honor of Kansas City's distinguished Superintendent of Schools, has the History of German Literature under discussion for the year. The programme arranged by Professor Greenwood, and neatly printed, shows the subject and the writer of each paper, the reading of which is followed by extemporaneous discussion. A veritable "feast of reason and flow of the soul," mingled with the greatest liberality of thought and feeling. No invidious distinction of race, sex or creed are known in the discussions or assignment of papers, and knowing whereof we speak, we dare to assert that even broad-minded New England does not possess a club where human beings meet as such on a more purely intellectual basis than this game Greenwood Club.The Missouri State Teachers' Association will hold its annual session in Sedalia, Mo., during the last week in December.The Author's Interstate Literary Association of Missouri, Kansas and Iowa, will convene in Atchison, Kansas, at about the same time.J.S. YATES.LOUISIANA.Alice Ruth MooreALICE RUTH MOORE, EDITOR."Who dares stand forth," the monarch cried,"Amid this throng, and dare to giveTheir aid, and bid this wretch to live?I pledge my faith, and crown beside,A woeful sight, a sorry sight,This outcast from all God-given grace.What, hoQ In all no friendly face,No helping hand to stay his plight.St. Peter's name be pledged for aye,The man's accursed, that is true;But, ho, he suffers. None of youWill mercy show, or pity sigh?"Strong men drew back, and lordly trainDid slowly file from monarch's look,Whose lip curled scorn. But from a nookA voice cried out, "Though he has slainThat which I loved the best on earth,Yet will I tend him till he dies;I can he brave." A woman's eyesGazed back from there.Christmas and all its joys is upon us. Many happy returns of the day.In the November Ladies' Home Journal there is a symposium of noted women on the question of the best age for women. As it local critic caustically remarks, "all being over thirty, the opinion is unanimous on the average of twenty-five to forty."Leaving aside the dry, hackneyed statistics which show us that Cleopatra was in her prime at forty, that Elizabeth and the Russian Catherine charmed all beholders at forty-five, that Helen of Troy was well advanced in age when the famous siege began, still, reason compels almost anyone to admit that only after the touch of years has pressed woman's forehead is she of any solid, sound, practical opinions; for with the fire of genius, which burns all unchecked and untended in youth, there should be united the tenderness and forbearance and patience, which come from sorrows borne; the grave wisdom, which comes from years; the gentle dignity, which comes from mingling in the world; the complete realization of one's own power and failings, which comes from

measuring and comparing other intellects with one's own; then there is, indeed, "a perfect woman, nobly planned."Miss Neal Gertrude Hawkins, the pretty songbird from Kentucky, with Miss Eva Frazier, a gifted reader, and Prof. Morris, the musician of the company, delighted New Orleans one night. But now the public is all on the qui vive, eagerly, anxiously awaiting Flora Batson, who is so well liked here. Her advance agent is now in the city perfecting arrangements.Speaking of nervous prostration, and the almost universal grip it has upon the women of America, Rebecca Harding Davis suggests that most of the fatigue and worry and prostration of women is caused, not by the amount of work they do, or the crowding of their lives but by the fuss they make about it. The continually recurring cry, "I have not the time," which besets us at every fresh allusion to any plan, is raised, if you will notice, by those who have the least to do, for should you visit their homes you will often find them sitting for hours with idle hands folded in their laps. Depend upon it, it is only the lazy ones who "haven't the time" to do little ends of favors.The churches are in the lead now. On the 26th of November the Masonic lodge held forth in an entertainment at Union Chapel on Brenville St. The students' Orchestra played, of course; how could it have been a successful entertainment if Prof. Nickerson had not stood before his earnest girls and waved his baton as they made "those little stringed wooden things" speak the heart's language?And then on the 19th the ladies of St. Luke held a cute little "Brownie" social, which gave everyone lots of fun and netted some dollars for the church fund.It was left for Central Church to celebrate Thanksgiving, holding a two nights' feast under the auspices of the Christian Endeavor societies. Now for the Christmas trees!Wordsworth's idea, "Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting," which has long been considered as the ultra development of an unconventional intellect, can be put to shame by some of childhood's theories. Very few little people will realize or will believe that the soul "knows its haunts no more." No, they think, not clearly and concisely, nor perhaps knowing what it is they do think, that somehow, someway they will return. As a little one expressed it, "All the men that died in the war, they comed back and be'd other people;" and no amount of coaxing or threatening or cross-questioning could make her say aught of her idea save that "she always thought so." Like Topsy, "it jest growed."Here is a theme for Darwinian theorists, for psychological investigators. Do our every-day ideas come to us the result of study, of association, of inspiration, or of pre-natal impressions? Do the unformed thoughts of childhood remain with us, growing more complete with years, or do they vanish and are replaced by the newer and grosser ones of the world as it comes when we are old? Debating societies, take up your weapons!PENNSYLVANIA.Dora J. ColeDORA J. COLE, EDITOR.PHILADELPHIA.An interesting and noteworthy organization is the Educational Club of this city. It has been in existence for three years. It is composed of about thirty young women and girls who meet for real earnest study. Miss Fanny Somerville deserves the credit of inaugurating the club and keeping the thorough and practical work in smooth running order. Two comfortable parlors are rented for the use of the girls and evening classes are held.There is instruction given in the English branches, bookkeeping, German and literature. This winter a class in current topics has been started. The girls are encouraged to talk land ask questions about events of interest that are going on all the time. History-making events we call them. Great interest is shown in this class and the girls eagerly listen and show an intelligent appreciation of their leader's efforts to interest them in the best of current news.An interesting sermon, book, or magazine article often furnishes the topic. Miss M. G. Jones last winter conducted a successful course in literature. Dr. Rebecca Cole has taught the German class for two years. The services of the teachers are gratuitous, thus making it possible for the club to pay the rent and buy necessary books at a comparatively small cost to each member. This is the kind of work that helps make our women ready for the opportunities that are opening for them. This is the "woman's century," it is said, and although colored women come last in the American scheme of life, it behooves the girls of our race to equip themselves so as to act their parts worthily.In lighter vein we turn to listen to the joy bells ringing for the marriage of a sweet Philadelphia

maiden. Mr. Jno. F. Cook, Jr., of Washington, was wed with Miss Elizabeth Abele on Dec. 4, 1894. The happy pair are to live in Idaho, where the groom is at present engaged in business. With truth it may be exclaimed:"A sweeter creature ne'er drew breath
Than my son's wife" -- Elizabeth.After several year's work and thought, the labors or Mrs. Fanny Jackson Coppin have taken practical shape in the outward visible sign of a Woman's Exchange, which opened about Dec. 1.A house has been secured and furnished, where samples of millinery, dressmaking, art needlework and cooking will be shown. There will be classes taught in each of the above branches by colored women, graduates of the Industrial school already established and connected with Mrs. Coppin's school, the Institute for Colored Youth.The upper rooms of the house are to be used its dormitories for pupils who come from a distance to study in these schools. Philadelphia owes much to the energy and ability of this accomplished woman. She is always planning and spending herself and her means to improve the condition of her race.We feel a certain amount of pride in the fact that the papers of two of our townswomen, at the recent Conference of Colored Workers held in that city, were so good and showed so comprehensive a knowledge of church work, that these ladies were sent as delegates to the National Missionary Council which met in Hartford, Conn. Bishop Coleman, of Delaware, was at St. Thomas' Church when these papers were read, and he considered them of such special excellence that he proposed that the ladies be sent to Hartford to read their contributions there. Dr. Matlack, Who was also present, seconded the suggestion, and both gentlemen showed their interest by Offering to defray the expenses of the trip.Miss Lucretia Miller, of St. Thomas, wrote on "Woman's Work in the Parish."Miss Ella Shepherd, of the Church of the Crucifixion, took for her theme, "Woman as a Teacher in the Sunday School."These ladies were the only colored delegates.Have you just a little more space to hear about a musical and Shakesperian recital held recently? The occasion was very much enjoyed by a select and appreciative audience. Mr. R. Henri Strange showed his versatility in widely contrasted selections from Shakespeare, being especially happy in his rendition of scenes from Hamlet. Miss Scudder of Newark, N. J., is a pianist of great merit. She is young, and a brilliant future may be predicted for her.Mr. Henry Jackson of Brooklyn evoked much enthusiasm by his sympathetic and mellow voice, which, by the way, is in the lower register, very similar to the delightful quality of Boston's favorite, Mr. George Ruffin.But the real interest of the occasion to many of the beaux and belles who were present was the appearance of Mr. Leon Ashleigh Gray, the Beau Brummel of New York society. The sweet and clear tenor voice, the immaculate toilet, the tasteful--bouquet, I must say, for boutonniere is too small--were altogether too much for some of the ladies, for I heard one little dear exclaim, "Oh, isn't he just too lovely!"ILLINOIS.Fannie Barrier WilliamsFANNIE BARRIER WILLIAMS, EDITOR.A Word of Tribute to John Brown.Though the eternal harmonies were ours,Dazzling vistas, unclouded skies;Though o'er a pathway strewn with flowers,We tread the path where honor lies;We still must find our highest livingThrough the gate where heroes depart--The only way to heaven's thanksgiving,'Tis the harvest home of the heart.Soon will the silence of night come down;O, heart of mine! look above,The light that gleams from a martyr's crownIs transfigured into love.A few years ago the Prudence Crandall Club of this city undertook to awaken interest in the study of the abolition heroes. The club was so far successful that memorial services in honor of the great prophets of forty years ago have been regularly held on the first Sunday in January each year. The character of these services has been of an unusually high order, and have from year to year been looked forward to as an occasion of inspiration and reconsecration to the high ideals of the men and women who have glorified American history.This year the John Brown League is making large preparations to commemorate the thirty-fifth anniversary of the execution of our sainted hero.Three winter's ago, Mrs. John Jones of this city called to the attention of the younger generation that John Brown was pre-eminently deserving of a day of affectionate remembrance and tributes of honor in our calendar of celebrities. The Service held in her hospitable home was one of the most notable of meetings in the inspirations felt by all present. It was the rare privilege of herself and her late estimable husband to have furnished home and shelter and succor to the indomitable hero whenever he was in Chicago. The memories of that meeting, held at the hearth-stone where John Brown was so abundantly and gratefully welcomed by the gentle graciousness of his surviving friend and helper, have suggested the memorial services now being arranged for.In view of these suggestions and memories I cannot refrain from adding my word or tribute to the hero of Ossawatomie.This day, hallowed by John Brown's triumphant death, is a fitting occasion for all lovers of liberty in America to renew their vows of devotion on the altars of praise and thanksgiving.John Brown was only a man. He was without honor or any of the trappings of greatness, yet to understand and fully know the significance of that homely name requires the perspective of a century of history and a study of all the open and secret forces of American civilization. The soul of John Brown was the magnet that drew all the forces of opposing interests to the stupendous crisis of 1861.It is Emerson who says that God offers to each mind the choice between repose and truth. If your choice is repose then you are satisfied with the first religious creed, the first philosophy or the first politics that comes your way. Your pleasures and griefs are all conventional. To be comfortable and let alone is the motive of your life. The great demands of truth, of liberty and justice annoy you. You stand for the dead weight of inertia in all human progress. On the other hand, you who desire truth from the free and bountiful hand of the Almighty become a part of the dynamics of progress in humanity. Truth means restlessness and an uncompromising hate of wrong. It means reformation and the force of virtue in human affairs. He who chooses truth as a life motive is always and at all places a candidate for truth at whatever cost.To such an one nothing is sacred or holy that is not illumined by the pure white light of truth.The sum total of all our religion and our faith in God and man and government is our unyielding loyalty to all revelations of truth.The supremacy in human history of such names as Savanarola, Luther, Cromwell, Washington and Lincoln are but so many evidences of truth exalted in human character.It was the heroic Search to realize his own conception of truth that guided Columbus through mists of doubt and the perils or untried waters to the blessed haven of it new continent. The same thing made Dante magnificent in exile and the black hero, Toussaint L'Overteur, greater than Napoleon.The choice of truth means the choice of conflict, of sacrifice, and perchance of death, for it has been decreed from the beginning of man that there shall be no greatness for mankind except by heroic effort and endurance for truth's sake.By right of the extraordinary strength of his personality and by virtue of what he himself did and caused a whole nation to do, John Brown is for all time an eminent example of those who become strong and great by choice of truth.John Brown came into the world at a period that became illustrious for its unequalled number of great men. While his contemporaries became eminent in literature, statesmanship and oratory, John Brown was still a man of the woods and unknown and unheeded. He literally walked through these states of the Union seeing many things and pondering them in his heart. He saw the glory of his country reflected from the majesty of its mountains and from the peace and beauty of its valleys. He communed with the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and felt proud of them all its a part of the heritage of freedom. But, alas! there was to all of his senses a discordant element. There was a shadow of evil over all that was fair and bright and promising. He saw his countrymen everywhere serving the cause of liberty with one hand and the cause of oppression with the other. Everywhere he heard his countrymen exulting in liberty, yet justifying bondage. He heard the statesman of his day equally eloquent on the theme of the Declaration of Independence and the codes of slavery. He saw the arrogant power of slavery defying all that was hallowed in religion, precious in democracy, and authoritative in law. He saw the nation's supreme oracle of justice sink to the lowest depths of injustice in the Dred Scot decision. His soul was heavy with grief because of the unutterable shame of his country as written in the fugitive slave law. He saw the Missouri Compromise swept away by the same fiendish spirit of Slavery. In fact, he saw freedom as a progressive force in the republic "banished to brutish beasts," and the opposite of all that was nobly fought for and nobly writ in law and the nation's heart aggressive, ascendant and triumphant. But what could John Brown do to stay this full tide of evil? Was he not poor, uneducated and unrelated to the men and women of power, and far removed from the forces that make and unmake governments?And then again were not such men as Whittier, Phillips, Douglass, Garrison and Sumner doing all that was possible to be done? Everywhere the righteous were praying for abolition, and was it not written by the hand of God that the power of the righteous always prevailed?John Brown may have asked himself all of these questions, but to every such question was the answer--Courage! He felt the exulted precept of Phillips, that in the cause of right the terms minority and majority were meaningless. He did not deprecate the gentle forces of prayer, eloquence and literature that were so powerfully arrayed against slavery, yet he saw that all these things were like casting pearls before swine in their inefficiency to overthrow the power of slavery. With marvellous insight John Brown saw that American slavery in its violent subversion of all laws and rights, and in its aggressive sovereignty over all the forces of government, was nothing less than a state of open war against the Union.If the American people could but see this and feel this as he did, the path of duty would be easy.The need of the hour was not the spirit of peace and conciliation, but rather the spirit militant to dare and do the bloody work of war."To arms, to arms," for the rescue of American liberty, was the one call needed as a fitting challenge to the leagured forces of oppression. It is to the undying glory of John Brown that he gave this first alarm and with superlative heroism first led the forces of warfare in Kansas and Virginia against the invasions or slavery. With the military eye of a great general John Brown saw that Kansas was the picket-line of freedom. The fell purpose of slavery, to trample into the dust the letter and spirit of the Missouri Compromise, and to invade the virgin soil of liberty and to extend its foul conquest over every inch of territory in the Northwest covered by the American flag, was to John Brown and his followers the very culmination of treasonable aggression against the republic. Who now could hesitate to unsheath the sword of war? Alas, for the cause of freedom! Alas, for the prophecies of Plymouth Rock and of '76 if now, in its hour or peril on the free soil of Kansas, liberty could find no champion to flash the sword of resistance against the dire encroachments of the slave power I will not attempt to retell the oft repeated stories of the eventful tragedies enacted oil the soil of Kansas. If you were not a part of it, or have never read it, you have missed one of the most instructive and dramatic chapters of American history. Here was the storm-center of the nation's first alarm. In the history of it all John Brown's righteous soul breathes in every chapter. Take the name of John Brown out of the history of "Bloody Kansas" and the grand meaning of it all shrinks into a mere guerilla warfare. John Brown's warfare for loyalty and freedom in Kansas was a profound object-lesson for all America. It furnished to all christendom in a most dramatic way the dire meaning of American slavery. It brought into startling contrast the two civilizations of America and bondage under the name of Union. What an awful absurdity was this from 1856 to 1859! How all history now rings with praises to John Brown for empasizingemphasizing that absurdity in Kansas and Virginia.Men of great piety and unerring grasp of the deeper meaning of things begin now to speak more and more confidently of the suggestive kinship between Calvary and the hills of Virginia. Can the souls of men be freed by a single death? Can the limbs of man be unchained and his soul take the wings of liberty by a single death? Call the great universe of mankind catch glimpses of immortality in the hallowed glow of all that is pure, beautiful and good, in a single death? Thanks to the human soul and its capacity for infinite goodness, Calvary and Virginia can give an answering "yes" to these exalted questionings of the human heart.COLORADO.Elizabeth Piper EnsleyELIZABETH PIPER ENSLEY, EDITOR.Election Day.Then, it ever, came perfect day.The clear atmosphere brought the mountains into bold relief. A glance at their strong outline, striking fearlessly against the cloudless sky, would fill any soul with inspiration. What wonder, then, that the women of Colorado stepped forth on the morning of the 6th of November, with enthusiasm unbounded, to exercise for the first time the crowning act of citizenship.Conscious of being critically watched by forty-two states, they were especially anxious that the result of this experiment should prove conclusively that women would vote.At seven o'clock, when the polls opened, half of those in line were women. It was interesting to note the different voters; young girls who looked to be scarcely twenty-one standing in line with white-haired matrons. All nationalities were represented.It is said that such rapid voting was never before witnessed in Denver. It was also the most quiet.In nearly all the precincts the heaviest vote was polled during the morning. In one of the largest precincts, at two o'clock, P. M., 550 out of 675 votes which belonged to that department, had been polled.At one of the polling places a woman was on hand at half past five o'clock, declaring that she was there to cast the first ballot.The women not only voted, but they worked zealously and untiringly, many of them beginning before daylight. Women of all parties took an active part, but the Republican women seemed rather the most enthusiastic. They were most systematically organized and had worked the field thoroughly. All voted, those who had protested against having the ballot thrust upon them and those who had hitherto taken no interest in politics. They electioneered, they drove from house to house bringing voters to the polls.The women generally followed the instructions of the party leaders and voted the prepared slate, through fear of losing their votes if they scratched their tickets. The credulity of woman was played upon to the utmost. It is known, however, that some women were independent enough not to mark the party emblem.The Republicans were triumphant; they won by a handsome majority. In Arapahoe county no other party could claim anything. This was probably due to the determination to defeat Gov. Waite, against whom there is a strong sentiment, not only among the opposing factious, but in his own party. Voters from all ranks were induced to join the Republicans in order to elect Mr. McIntire over Gov. Waite.Lessons learned from the election and campaign preceding it:1. Women will study politics. Proven by the great number of political study clubs formed during the past year. A populist woman, who stumped the state, says, "Politics was the theme of discussion morning, noon and night. The women talked politics over their sewing, their dish-washing, and during their social calls. Politics has made them read and think more, and in new and different lines. Some of the women are getting these economic questions drilled into their heads in a way that would astonish you, and when the mothers understand these things it is going to make a

vast difference, for they will teach them to the children."2. Women will vote. The women of Colorado have demonstrated that conclusively.3. They will generally vote straight. This fact was shown by the Republican women, though it may be that in this instance they believed it necessary to do so in the interest of law and order.4. There should be thorough and systematic organization of the women of all parties.The good government committee will now take steps to strengthen its force and organize more thoroughly for the municipal election in the spring.The first important work of the women will be to see that the party emblem in the Australian ballot is done away with, thus insuring a truly secret ballot, find therefore more independent voting.The readers of the ERA will be interested to know what special part the colored women have taken in the election. Most of them have done admirable work in the interest of the Republican party. They also formed clubs of their own and heroically helped their brothers to elect a representative to the legislature, although the majority of those brothers voted against woman's enfranchisement.They made good campaign speeches.Mrs. Olden is deserving of especial mention. She was one of fourteen delegates sent from the colored Republican club to the county convention held last summer. She suggested that they ask for representation in the state convention, but was discouraged by her too-timid brothers, on the ground that there was no use asking for what they would not get. But this courageous little woman persisted. The outcome of it all was that Mrs. Olden was unanimously elected third Vice-President of the Republican State League of Colorado. She has done most excellent work for the party.Mrs. Olden is a graduate of Fisk University. On the eve of election in November, '93, she came to Denver from Tennessee at the head of a small colony of people who longed for the free air of the mountains. They sought a dwelling place where free speech would not be denied them.The colored women of Denver have recognized the worth of Mrs. Olden by making her president of their league lately organized, and about which I will tell you later.THE COLLEGE SETTLEMENTS.Ella Lavinia SmithELLA LAVINIA SMITH.Paper No. 3.Other American Settlements include the one in Philadelphia opened in April, 1892, in connection with work already begun by the St. Mary Street Library Association; Denison House, Boston, opened Jan. 1, 1893; Andover House, Boston, opened in fall, 1892; the Neighborhood Guild, founded by Dr. Stanton Coit in New York City, and opened in 1887; the University Settlement in Philadelphia, opened in Jan., 1893; East Side House, New York, opened early in 1891; the Epworth League Settlement, Boston, founded in 1892, and Hull House, Chicago, opened in Sept., 1889.Of the Philadelphia Settlement Miss Hannah Fox said, in the Third Annual Report of the College Settlement Association, "The situation offered differed from the New York situation, in being off a side street in a shiftless neighborhood, among a less provident class of people, most of them being colored. ... The comfort of the house is greatly enhanced by the Starr Garden, which adjoins it. This garden is now owned by the City Park Association, and is opened daily under the care of a guardian, for the free use of the people, and is always placed at our disposal. ... There is an admission fee to all classes where anything like a trade is taught, as it is not felt advisable to give, all things involving a sacrifice being more truly valued. What the young boys and girls in the St. Mary's street neighborhood need most of all is work--good, steady, intelligent work. It is not lack of money which is the poverty we most deplore, but lack of self-hood, that self-hood which comes from work and makes it a blessing even though it be a bitter struggle for existence."Denison House, Boston, named for Edward Denison, whose pioneer work in London has already been noticed, is in a neighborhood largely Irish, though Jews, Italians, Poles, Hungarians, and Armenians are also to be found there. Drunkenness with its attendant evils abounds, and the young people have but few quiet and respectable meeting places.Already, however, in the short time that the house has been opened, the residents have gained the confidence and sympathy of many of their neighbors, and have come to understand, in some measure, the forces at work in the community for good and for evil. The work of Denison House will probably be especially along the lines of University and College Extension, and the organization of labor, and though but little that is definite can now be said, yet much is hoped for the future, because of the good foundation already laid.All loyal club women will patronize our advertisers, and so help to make our paper a valuable advertising medium. We are happy to be able to personally endorse nearly all the advertisers. In this connection, we would like to call especial attention to some of our advertisements.A Loyal Woman.The following is an extract from a most welcome and interesting letter from Mrs. Sylvia Maples of Knoxville, Tenn. Oh, for a host of her kind! "The WOMAN'S ERA is a much-needed issue in a much-needed hour, and if every woman of our race felt its need as I do, they would never know rest until they see it in the homes of all our people."The Ladies' Home Journal is the intellectual, social and political medium of the women, and of the white woman, more especially so. It does not in a single particular touch our interests and our peculiar race wants, yet we help with our one dollar a year to make it what it is--the most widely popular paper upon the globe. One more month, and this year is gone from us. Now if we would but deny ourselves (and to many, as with myself it would mean denial) the Home Journal or some other pleasure or luxury, we could give that one dollar in the forthcoming year to our own representative, the ERA.LITERATURE NOTES.Medora W. GouldMEDORA W. GOULD.And so our dear Dr. Holmes did----"live to beThe last leaf on the tree."Among the many beautiful lessons to he drawn from the life of our beloved poet, is none of more prominence than that of the economy of time. For it will he remembered, that that by which he has endeared himself to countless numbers was accomplished in his spare moments.Although Dr. Holmes was undoubtedly a great and gifted poet, as well as an entertaining story-teller in his prose writings, it seems as if both of these gifts are subordinate to his own charming personality. It is neither the poet nor the prose writer that we have grown to love, or whom we mourn for now, but it is the man himself. In the "Autocrat" he has portrayed himself so faithfully that we can almost claim a personal acquaintance with him, and in his death feel the loss of a beloved friend.A convenient reference book on American literature, designed either for young people, or those whose school days are past, is "American Authors," by Mildred Rutherford. It contain numerous half-tone portraits, and a special feature is the test questions at the end of each chapter."The Aim of Life" by Philip Moxom is a volume of addresses designed as an aid to young people in the development of noble characters.A book that is interesting as well all instructive is Dr. Trumbull's "Studies in Oriental Social Life." It is particularly valuable as an aid in the Bible, for many of the things that are difficult to understand in Bible history can be readily comprehended when we have some knowledge of the social customs and inner life of the people. It is written of the Orient as it is today, but that part of the world has changed very little since the Bible was written."In the King's Country" is a delightfully entertaining story for girls. It is a story of Christian Endeavor and decidedly elevating and inspiring. "The Sherburne Cousins" is a still later book from her pen.Miss Finley, the author of the charming "Elsie" books, has written another, which is a story of the Worlds Fair as it appeared to Elsie."The Work of the Afro-American Woman" is a daintily bound volume whose author is Mrs. N. F. Mosell, the wife of Dr. Mosell of Philadelphia. Mrs. Mosell's very commendable object in writing this book was to do for the women of her own race what had already been done for other women more favorably circumstanced. She has gathered together much valuable information and presents it to her readers in a clear, bright and entertaining manner, and no one can read the little volume without feeling a deeper interest in the progress of his race, and gaining much inspiration for nobler and better work in the future.The plan of the book is quite comprehensive, containing reference the to work of our women in whatever lines in which they have achieved success, and is interspersed with interesting personal notes. Considerable space is devoted to the great works in which Miss Ida B. Wells is engaged.It is a pleasure to note that Mrs. Mosell has not omitted to mention that great army of women workers, the home-makers, whom it would be impossible to call by name, but to whom a race we owe far more for our advancement and improvement than we do to a few teachers and scribblers here and there. It is to the mothers, to those wives and mothers, who, by their refinement and influence for upright living elevate the character of the homes, that the race owes its real progress and advancement.Hall Caine, the author of "The Deemster," "The Bondman," and othere quallyother equally engrossing novels, has

written another called "The Mahdi," which lovers of this most admirable writer will eagerly welcome. It promises to be a tale of love and heroism. "The Manxman" is considered by deep thinkers to be by far the best novel published recently, in spite of the popularity of "Trilby" and others. In fact, it is declared by some to be the best book we have had since the publication of "Adam Bede." PaineCaine is at his best in the delineation of his masculine characters, and one's sympathy for the misfortune of his heroes is mingled with a deep admiration for their manliness and nobleness of soul.The sale of Du Maurier's "Trilby " is said to have reached one hundred thousand copies.It is rumored that F. Marion Crawford is to make his home in America, possibly either at New York or Washington. We can look forward to some rare stories of American life, if he treats us as well when with us as he has done other people when among them.THE CHICAGO WOMAN'S CLUB REJECT MRS. WILLIAMS.At the urgent solicitation of friends--members of the Woman's Club of Chicago--Mrs. Fannie Barrier Williams allowed her name to be offered for membership to that organization. For three years Mrs. Williams filled nearly all the offices, including that of vice-president and secretary of the Illinois Woman's Alliance, a central body composed of all the women's clubs. She is chairman of the committee on state schools for dependent children.She held a representative position on the World's Fair Board and took a prominent part in the parliament of religions. Her paper read at the gathering on "What can Religion do to advance the condition of the Negro?" together with her portrait, appears in the Rev. Dr. Barrow's work, "The World's Parliament of Religion." As a lecturer, Mrs. Williams is in great demand. And yet, although thus well equipped to help on the work the Woman's clubs are formed to do, the modicum of negro blood in her veins out-weighed her eminent fitness, and club principle made a weak surrender to personal prejudice, and her name was rejected.However, Mrs. Williams is philosophical and brave, and after the first sting of the affront put upon her is over, will recall with amused contempt the hysterical antics of her former associates in work, in their efforts to prevent the club giving legitimate recognition to the helpful work she had long been doing as an individual. Mrs. Williams can wait; there are greater things in store for her than mere membership in a club of narrow-minded women--and even that will come to her soon. There is no limit now to the possibilities of a woman endowed like Fannie Barrier Williams, and soon there will be no hindrance.For St. Monica's Benefit.The first doll exhibition ever given in Boston was held in the parlors of the Brunswick Hotel, Wednesday, Nov. 21st, for St. Monica's home for sick women. Every country that has a characteristic costume was represented. The tiniest dolls in the exhibit were a pair of Japanese twins, perfect dolls, not over two inches long. The affair was a great success in every way.One of the best preparations of its kind is the Witch Hazel Velvet Cream, for which W. F. and J. I. Kingsbury, Randolph, Mass., are agents. Anyone who received a sample at the World's Food Fair can testify as to its efficacy in whitening and softening the skin. Besides this, it is recommended as containing no lead, arsenic, mercury or any other poison, and can be applied in cases of abrasion or skin disease. It is for sale by all druggists.How the seasons glide by! Only a little while ago and 'twas summer; then golden autumn, with its wreath of red and russet tones, passed as in review; now the season of general rejoicing and family reunion--Thanksgiving--has come and gone, bringing rich memories, many tinged with sadness of other days. Of all days in the year there's none upon which we notice more naturally "an empty chair," ofttimes through a film of tears, or with more cordial welcome add another to the board. To one and all we wish a merry and bountiful feast, flavored by all that is generous and kind, graced by acts as well as word divine.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 9. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.FREE!
Another Splendid Premium Offer!The first premium offered last March having been won the publishers of the ERA take pleasure in announcing another which, if possible, surpasses the first.READ!
FIRST PREMIUM.For the boy or girl, man or woman who in the next 3 months brings in the largest number of paid up subscribers (over one hundred in number) we will give a course in Mr. Eastman's School of Carving and Modelling.N.B.--This course taken at its full value is worth two hundred dollars; it extends over a term of nine months, and at the end of that time pupils are prepared to become teachers of the art. No more valuable premium could be offered; in return for a little energy a splendid trade is given and a position to teach almost assured, or if teaching is not preferred, and the premium winner prefers actual work, good and paying positions are assured.SECOND PREMIUM.To the one bringing in the next largest number of subscribers, half a term at the above school will be given.THIRD PREMIUM.To the one bringing in the third largest number of subscribers a New World Type-writer will be given.FOURTH PREMIUM.To the four boys or girls (beginners in music) bringing in each ten subscribers in the next three months, a year's course in the Boston Training School of Music will be given.Do not pass this over lightly. The WOMAN'S ERA makes a specialty of preparing openings for young colored people; it realizes the difficulties they encounter in obtaining such openings and is prepared to do well by ambitious, earnest and determined young people. Don't complain of lack of chances if you let such as these pass you by.All contestants not receiving premiums will be allowed twenty-five per cent on all paid yearly subscriptions received.The time allowed is short, but people who are in earnest act at once.For further particulars, addressTHE WOMAN'S ERA,
103 Charles Street, Boston.SCHOOL OF MODELLING AND CARVING.TEACHERS AND CRAFTSMEN TRAINED IN THE FOLLOWING INDUSTRIAL ARTS.MODELLING for Stone and Plaster.
MODELLING for metals. etc.
CASTING for Stucco and metals.
FIGURE CUTTING in Piece and Mould.
STONE CARVING, Buildings, monuments and Ecclesiastical Works.
WOOD CARVING, for Metals, Internal and External Decoration.
PUPILS PREPARED to teach the above in one term of nine months.
CRAFTSMEN PUSHED in special branches and situations secured upon completion of term; or work secured while studying.For terms apply to
CLAVENGER A. EASTMAN,
St. Augustine's Trade Schools,
Corner Cambridge and Grove Sts., Boston.GEORGE L. RUFFIN,
LESSONS IN SINGING.Lamperti Method.After October 1st,  103 Charles Street.Dates for Cecilia Wage Earner's Concerts, are Nov. 27, Jan. 16, Mar. 17, May 1.TICKETS, 25 and 15c.
Apply for Tickets one week before each Concert, at above address.Help In Choosing a School.The publishers of the WOMEN'S ERA will, on application of any of its subscribers, send catalogues and all informations easily obtainable, concerning any academy, college, normal, music, or art school in New England, on receipt of stamped and directed envelope. Address,WOMAN'S ERA, 103  Charles St.EDGAR P. BENJAMIN,Attorney and Counsellor-at-LawRoom 22,
34 SCHOOL STREET, BOSTON.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 9. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.- TRY -
A PERFECT ICING FOR YOUR CAKES,Will not spoil or foment in heat or cold, covered or exposed to the air.PERFECT ICING never dries out or crumbles, all other Icings draw the moisture from the cake and dry it up. A PERFECT ICING will keep your cake from drying out.PERFECT ICING should be put on in a very thin coating, like a varnish; it will give your cakes a beautiful gloss as well as flavor. Can be cut soon as put on by dipping your knive in cold water.A 25c. Jar of PERFECT ICING will go further than 25 cents in Egg and Sugar Icing as you use it, is more healthful, and gives a superior flavor.PERFECT ICINGS are put up in Screw Top Jars, also in Mason quarts, and in wooden pails of 25 lbs. each.DIRECTIONS.Remove the top, set the Jar in a moderate oven or warm place, until the contents are thin enough to spread. Take your knife, stir it up and spread on a cold cake, just as thin as possible. Set your jar away to use again.Ask your Grocer for PERFECT ICING.
Almond, Coffee, Wild Grape, Orange, Strawberry, Vanilla, Chocolate, Pistash.Prepared only by A.H. Peloubet & Co., New York.
See our Trade Mark A.H.P. is on every Label.PERFECT ICINGS used in making Sherbets or Water Ices, Ice Creams, Sauces, Home Confections, etc. Will give their rich flavors and save work.B.P. Ray, Agent. 2 Chatham Row, Boston, Mass.THE CELEBRATED
Witch-Hazel Velvet CreamDoes not contain corrosive sublimate, lead, arsenic, mercury, or any poison. As a toilet article for tan, sunburn, moth, freckles, etc., its excellence cannot be too well recommended.
Put up in 60c. and $1.00 Sizes, sent postpaid on receipt of Price. 
AGENTS WANTED EVERYWHERE.For Sale by Druggists and Dealers in Toilet Supplies.All correspondence should be addressed to the New England Agents.W. F. & J. S. KINGSBERY
RANDOLPH, -     -   MASS. THE KRANICH & BACH PIANOSAgain took only Gold Medal at last Mechanical Fair for their unequalled patent Upright and Grands. Also Silver medal on Mehlin & Sons, and Stultz & Bauer Pianos. Also slightly used Steinway Grand for $400, Steinway Square $250, McPhail $190, nearly new Haynes Bros. Upright $325, new Ivers & Pond $225, H. F. Miller Parlor Grand $400, and fifty square Pianos from $50 to $200. Organs from $30 to $100.TERMS EASY.H.W.BERRY,646 Washington Street, -  BOSTON
Over Pray & Sons Carpet Store.Material furnished and a Stylish Walking or Visiting Dress made to order for $23.00, warranted to fit perfectly and finished in the best manner.Ladies can select material from any of the large dry goods houses, I will buy and be responsible for a handsome gown, at this extremely low figure.MRS. A.A. CASNEAU,Near Hammond St. 9 Greenwich St., Boston.ATTENTION LADIES.
Our Dress and Garment making is perfect; Prices reasonable; Fit, Style and Finish unsurpassed.
MILLINERY:
Hats and Bonnets made and Trimmed, 50c. to $1.00.
Our Millinery and Dress Cutting Schools are the best in the world. Young Ladies should come at once and learn.
HARVEY,  29 Temple Place, Boston.E.A. LIBBY,
New goods received by steamer every week. We never have an opening. 
Always ready to show goods.
-MILLINERY-
The old reliable house retains the same stand,
19 Temple Place, - -  Boston.H.B. McDERMOTT & CO.Dealers in and Manufacturers of
ALL KINDS OF WHALEBONE.
Dress and Corset Bone constantly on hand or
Made to order.Bone by the Ounce a Specialty.
673 Washington St., Boston
Opposite Beach Street.-THE-
NEW WORLD
TYPEWRITER.Price, $15.00
A useful and elegant present for ladies and gentlemen. Over 100,000 in use.
Perfectly simple, practical and durable.
No $100 machine can do better work.
Writes 77 characters. Capitals and small letters.
Never gets out of order. Perfect alignment always. 
No Instruction required. 
SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.
The Typewriter Improvement Co.
4 K Post Office Square, -  BOSTON, Mass.
Agents Wanted.DR. GEORGE LANG.Hair and Scalp Specialist,
28 Temple Place,
Boston, Mass.
Hours, 9 to 4. Rooms 6 and 7.MADAM CLOUD,
BUSINESS AND HEALTH
MEDIUM,NO. 7 Charles St., near Beacon,
Boston, Mass.
Office hours 9 to 11 a. m., 3 to 10 p. m.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 9. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era.ATLANTA UNIVERSITY, ALTANTAATLANTA, GA.
REV. HORACE BUMSTEAD, D. D. President.
THIS Institution trains and sends out a superior class of teachers and leaders for work among the Freedom of the South. It solicits the attendance of intelligent and earnest young men and women, and contributions from those who are willing to help towards their education. Write to the President.BOSTON TRAINING SCHOOL OF MUSICINCORPORATED
Vocal and Instrumental Music,
Harmony, Theory and Composition.
Pupils thoroughly Prepared for Teaching and Public Performance.
Central Location. CATALOGUE FREE.
GEORGE H. HOWARD, A. M., Director,
Music Hall Building, Boston, Mass.A.G. McKenzie
OPTICIAN.
Artificial Eyes a Specialty.
156 CHARLES ST.,  BOSTON
Three Doors From Eye Infirmary.
TELEPHONE, 219-3 TREMONT.BOSTON
Condensed Milk Co.'s
Plain condensed (unsweetened) Milk Is the best known food for infants. Best article in the world for a cup of coffee. Sold in jars at the office, 2 1/2 Park Sq., Boston. Delivered three times per week.
ENDORSEMENT.
I have used the plain condensed milk and found it worked like a miracle in transforming my weak, puny baby into a strong, plump one, after all other foods had failed.
MRS. MCGILL.
10 Lindall Place, Boston.500 AGENTS WantedTo Sell Our New Race BookHon. J. M. Langston
(The U.S. Representative from Va.)THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY of the Silver Tongued Colored Orator and polished Scholar Superbly Illustrated. Teaches that Self reliance is the Secret of Success. No Race library complete without it. SURE TO SELL. A great chance to make money Don't miss it. For Circulars and Terms to Agents, write to the American Publishing Co Hartford, Conn., Cinncinnati, or Boston.
Mention this Paper.PRIVATE BOARD.MRS. ELIZABETH E. COOLEY will accommodate a few select boarders.
Transient or permanent,
AT 62 PHILLIPS ST., BOSTON.THE AMERICAN WRINGER CO.
Branch Store
13 & 15 BROADWAY EXTENSION. Boston, Mass.
Manufacturers of Clothes Wringers. 
All kinds of Wringers and Sweepers repaired.
Orders by mail promptly attended to.LESSONS BY MAIL.
Instructions in English Composition, Grammar, Use of Capitals, Punctuation, Formation of Sentences, etc. Address,
Miss M. W. GOULD, Box 165.  Readville, Mass.What is this
A. P. A. ?
What its Plans?
Who its Candidates?
What its Principles?
Where can we join?
For full information, send 2-ct. stamp for --or ask your newsdealer for--or send 50 cts. for 3 mos. trial subscription of--the paper which advocates straight A. P. A. principles--THE AMERICAN CITIZEN, 
7 Bromfield St., Boston.This page features ads for Volume 1, Issue 9. Click here to view the ads on this page as they appeared in the Era."The best of all Medicines is -- none."THE NATURAL METHOD OF CURING OBESITY.Dr. Albert Reeder's Institute of Curative MovementsFranklin Savings Bank Building, 5 Park Square, Boston.
Office in charge of lady assistants.
Hours 10 to 12 a. m., 2 to 4 p.m.HOUSEKEEPERS SHOULD SEE THE NEWFIBRE CARPET.
A Soft, Pliable, Odorless Matting,
Warm in Winter, Cool in Summer.
An Ideal Sanitary Chamber Carpet
For All the Year Round.
Sews together and turns under.
Does not break or require binding.
No odors or germs or disease.
Insects do not trouble it.
Heavy furniture does not break it.
Double faced -- double wear.
Artistic colors -- stylish designs.
We cordially invite inspection.
HODGES FIBRE CARPET CO.
Manufacturers and Patentees,
50 Essex St. (cor. Chauncy) Boston, Mass.SANTA CLAUS' HEADQUARTERS.Tons of Candies.
Tons of New Nuts.
Raisins, Currants, Citron, Figs, Dates, etc.
Cut prices on Flour.
Bargains every day at
C. F. SMITH'S
CASH GROCERY,
112-114 Cambridge St., Boston.INCORPORATED UNDER THE LAWS OF MASSACHUSETTS.
EASTERN CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
OF BOSTON/Street Railway Builders and Contractors for Public Works.
ESTIMATES MADE FOR A COMPLETE UNDERGROUND SYSTEM.
GEO. S. BARNES, President.
STANLEY RUFFIN, Sec'y and Treas,BUTLER R. WILSON, ATTORNEY and COUNSELLOR AT LAW,NOTARY PUBLIC, 34 School Street, (Room 33,)
BOSTON.Robert L. Carter, M. D.
PHYSICIAN & SURGEON
No. 722 Kempton Street,
NEW BEDFORD.
Diseases of Women a Specialty.
Telephone 329-4.34 School Street, Boston.FRANK S. MURPHY
Grocer
61 Charles Street, cor Mt. Vernon St.
Boston, Mass.