THIS WAY OUT Advert included in front of Dudeney's "This Way Out"
THIS WAY OUTBY MRS.HENRY DUDENEY METHUEN AND CO., LTD.36 ESSEX STREET W.C.LONDONTHIS WAY OUTPROLOGUEA MAN came out from a stone Rectory which stood back from the high road that leads from St. Ives to Zennor. Behind the house was blazing sea and jagged rocks. When the Revd. John Trewhella opened his door he heard the waves dashing below Clodgy Point. It was a summer morning, colour-patched and tender; happy little insects buzzed in a maze before his eyes: but the sea, down there by Clodgy, was always grim.Trewhella walked out into the high road. He was smiling in a quietly succulent way and every movement of his lithe, small body expressed extreme content. He was amiable this morning. Rebecca had accepted him last night—and then there was that other circumstance; the something that mattered more than Rebecca. Oh yes, it was certainly beyond Rebecca in value: he was a frigid young man.He dismissed Rebecca and pondered upon the ecstatic something else. His hand went up with a mechanical adoration and tapped his breast pocket Papers were hidden there; those notes of his, those designs and measurements which meant so much. It | was a lover's gesture when he tapped his pocket and a lover's look upon his lean brown face.Ambition was more than a woman, and he saw the way to gratify his.Only last night he had asked Rebecca to marry him; Rebecca with her fiery, odd heart and her odd appearance. She was of a type uncommon, yet not unknown, in Cornwall.She had red hair, dull, deep and plentiful. She ha a yellow skin and small black eyes set close together Her hands and feet were extraordinarily delicate, an so was the entrancing curl of her little ears. Her mouth was red and large, with an upward twist to the corners. Her long black eyelashes also curled, an this double twirling made her piquant or made he sinister—according to her mood.When he had asked her to marry him, when he had, correctly, held her in his arms and kissed her, she had displayed a candid joy that alienated him. It had made him shy and made him afraid. Rebecca was all-possessive: she was new wine—to an abstemious man.Would she ask too much? Would she engulf him in desire and drive out other things?He felt that suspicion of women which the early Fathers felt. But they were afraid for their hopes of heaven; John Trewhella trembled for his chances upon earth. No wife should cut across or curtail his great ambition.Since last night he had been asking himself—was it a mistake? Perhaps he ought not to have made love to Rebecca. Probably he could get on better without a wife. Would the coming mating gall and devitalise him?He walked down the high road towards St. Ives, thinking odd thoughts for a betrothed man.Yes, he must marry. He had a great rambling Rectory, stone-floored, cold and stern. It wanted a wife and children to warm it, to fill it and furnish it. However rich he grew, he would not relinquish his living.Again, there was a lot of dissent in Cornwall, and if the clergyman remained single he would be called Popish.Rebecca would warm the house and make the garden bloom. At present nothing consented to blow in it but the graceful great fuchsia bushes that grew like weeds and blocked the light from his study window. He had fuchsia bushes and green euonymus, very little else, for he was not a gardening man.Then again, she was more suitable than any other girl, for she was the late Rector's daughter. It was convenient that she should return as a bride to the house where she had been born.This was early June and 1854. In those days the Stennack, which is the steep street leading down to the town of St. Ives, was verdant and beautiful. Trees arched overhead, the stream at the side of the street was silver-clear; quite free of tin washings. There were no mines near the Stennack in those days.The colours of early summer lay strong upon the Cornish landscape. In little lanes that turned off from this main street, in fields that stretched away on either side was a rose-hued wantonness—of foxgloves, ragged robin, wild geranium and all the rest.Trewhella walked on vaguely, meditating upon Rebecca, shrinking modestly from the memory of last night. She had been a plump, warm rhapsody when she lay in his arms through their pause of betrothal. She had laughed, she had stretched her long throat—yellow it was, as all her skin. It had seemed to say—that throat of ancient ivory—'kiss me too; don't leave me out in the cold. Let me keep company with her mouth.'Trewhella could imagine all this and be supremely shocked by it. He was going to marry her. She was a well-born girl, and he liked her mother, who was an excellent housekeeper and would live with them. He was going to marry her: yet, significantly, he had told her nothing of his secret. Although those scribbled notes on bits of paper in his pocket would change their future! He could not tell her; it was an affair to discuss with men, it was also something to keep sacred. To-night he would go and see Botallack. He had discovered and perfected an idea which would revolutionise the mining industry, not only here in Cornwall but in other mining districts. To-night he would lay the scheme before Botallack, who was their magnate in the mining world down here in St. Ives.This invention would make his fortune; much more, it would make enduring fame. He would lift himself clean out from the groove of common men: and this he had desired; it had been his prevailing fever. The name of Trewhella would re-echo long after he was deadAt the bottom of the hill, at the corner where the town begins, on the exact spot where the Post Office now stands, a man came out from an imposing stone house.It had a handsome door in the middle and, on each side, heavily framed, narrow windows set in great wooden shutters painted green. A garden, grey-walled, flowed round the house, and over the top of the wall were prolific hints of figs, medlars, myrtles and all the gracious things that grow in a soft climate.It was the doctor's house, and the doctor, Andrew Curnow, coming out. He was a bachelor, and an elder sister lived with him.He came out, a big, downcast, slovenly young man; from the placid house that seemed to smile upon the deviating nervous streets with their noisy traffic and cobbled ways. He stumbled on the three steps, shallow and curved, that led to the pavement from his door.Trewhella, passing, seized his arm. "Hallo!" he said. "Caught your foot in something, Curnow?""Very likely," said Curnow, looking up. "Thanks, Trewhella; you've probably saved me from a cut face."They walked on together, each man wearing the sober clothing of his profession. But Trewhella was fastidiously precise and brushed, while Curnow looked tumbled, as he always did. He was an inherent sloven.Trewhella was small and black, moving and glancing quickly; Curnow was large and blonde and slow. A golden stubble was on his fat cheeks, his blue eyes—kind and sleepy, yet certainly clever—seemed dull to-day. He displayed his general air of not having been long out of bed. He always looked like that, even if he had been up all night with a patient. This very often happened; for he had a big practice, and possessed skill beyond the average.There was a new slovenliness—emotional—about Curnow this morning. Something had happened to him or was going to happen. Trewhella speculated upon his neighbour as they walked together. He speculated and his small fidgety body became goose-flesh all over. Had Curnow decided to take a wife? Or had he—invented something? The very idea of another man forestalling him made Trewhella's head ready to burst. While he thought these thoughts concerning Curnow, the narrow street and the moving sea, on to which so many alleys opened, spun together. There was neither land nor water; there was one confusion.He was jealous about his invention and frenzied. He would not be happy until it was placed upon the market, until it was made safe, until his name was associated with it. He wished to God that he was a mining expert and not a clergyman. Then he would do the whole thing himself. And he could not. He would have to trust Botallack—and Botallack would trust someone else.Oh, certainly it meant more to him than Rebecca. Could you compare a red-headed, candid woman, to a thing like that which would give you Fame?He smiled superbly. Curnow caught that smile."You seem happy, Trewhella.""I am." Trewhella's answer was prompt. "You, on the contrary, are not. Anything happened?""Yes," said Curnow, "something has happened." He said no more but walked on, his big head, covered with sandy hair, tilted dejectedly.They walked together along the streets. It was market day and they
returned many greetings. Carts clattered over
the cobble stones, men shouted, women shrilled, little groups of
gossips blocked the corners and bunched in the doorways. The shops, bow-fronted and little-paned, were crowded. Carriers' carts and gaily painted omnibuses came in from adjacent districts. They stopped outside the pastrycook's near the Town Hall, and country women with ample market baskets and multitudinous petticoats came carefully down the steps of the vehicles and went into the pastry-cook's for a glass of port and a pasty before they started shopping.From all the narrow ways that led out to the quay, came suck of the waves, bustle of the fishing life and smell of fish curing. There was a jostle of tawny sails and a movement of brown-faced men. They wore linen jumpers that were in any shade from rose to mahogany; garments that were as the sails of the smacks and had been in the same brew with the nets."You seem happy, Trewhella," Curnow repeated.He put his mouth close to his friend's ear, shouting. You had to shout to make yourself heard above the clatter of the market."I am happy," returned the clergyman coldly."And you've been drinking, Curnow.""Port, just British port; the drink—comforting and safe—of all these old women," the young doctor waved his plump hand towards the pastry-cook's. "I need it. I was up this morning and out by six.""A patient?""No. A caprice.""Unlike you—to be pulled out of bed. And you didn't shave.""No," Curnow thoughtfully fondled his cheek with an indolent finger, "I ought to have done but I didn't. It did not matter as things turned out; yet it might have made all the difference. Well now, Trewhella, I repeat, you seem happy!""I don't deny it. Rebecca Hamlyn accepted me last night.""Did she? So that's it.""Yes, that's it," said Trewhella curtly.He wished that Curnow, a man for whom he did not care, would go away. Personal carelessness revolted him more than any graver fault. He could not forgive the doctor his dirty cheeks and chin. He stopped, holding out his hand."I won't hinder you, Curnow.""You're not hindering me." Curnow looked at him oddly. "I haven't any sick beds—that won't wait. Which way are you going? Clodgy? I'll walk with you.""I was thinking of Clodgy," admitted Trewhella grudgingly.For he so wished to be alone. He was in that rapt state when we demand to be alone. Most men and women feel this demand with Love—then is the isolate, heavenly time: Trewhella felt it with Ambition. He wanted to sit on the edge of the rocks and think-of Rebecca? Most certainly not—but of his true darling, his invention."I'll go with you," said Curnow.He had barely said this when an old woman stopped him. She was ancient; there was a sternness about her glazed eyes and afforested wrinkles. She chilled the day with her austerity. She said to Curnow, speaking in pronounced Cornish dialect and—in the Cornish way—letting her voice rise to a sing-song at the end of a sentence,"You come along home with me, Dr. Curnow, and take a look at Richard-John. He's got a chill in his innards through changing his underclothes. He will change and he will swill. He says,' I can't get on without washing my face, mother.' But he don't belong to make the kitchen clammy, passing through and rubbing his chin with a wet clout, nigh every morning.""I'll come in half an hour, Mrs. Henry Ivery.""You'll come now, else what does we pay you for." She caught at the lapel of his black coat with her long, dirty claws. "Richard-John's groaning fit to pull the place down. You could hear him from Court Cocking to Street-an-Carrow.""I told you, Curnow," Trewhella's smile was grim, "that a sick bed would claim you.""Lordy, Lordy, he ain't took to his bed, parson," screamed Mrs. Henry Ivery. "He's by the fire hollowing for a bucket of hot water to shove his legs in. But I ain't washed my feet and legs for forty"——"I'll come, I'll come," said Curnow, with a look at his friend's disgusted face."God Almighty never reckoned with so much washing and changing," grumbled the old woman."Colic, that's the punishment He do give.""If your son gets worse, send for me," said Trewhella, moving away."Send for you! He ain't on his death-bed, parson."She shuffled towards the Digey, where she lived. Curnow followed her.Trewhella went on by himself; raising his hand gravely to his hat repeatedly, saluting his neighbours. Everybody had seen him part from Curnow. Everybody had seen Curnow go away with Mrs. Henry Ivery towards the Digey. He recalled this later on. It became an important factor.He walked away, seeing things—with a glance that was keen yet haphazard.He saw a fisherman talking to the town crier and swinging a bunch of fresh-caught fish in one hand. They looked like flowers.He saw women with shawls over their heads leaning over the railings of those mean houses in Back Road East; making balconies of them, becoming, with their pale faces and dark eyes, almost Spanish. He saw other women shaking out the gay rugs which they wove and often washed.He walked without method, twisting up and down and in and out of the narrow streets; bound for the sea and the rocks; yet in no hurry to get there. He had shaken off Curnow and that was enough. He now had all day for his dreamings and after tea he would go and see Botallack, who lived in a big house near the Malakoff.He saw a crippled fisherman sitting in a chair by an open door and looking towards the sea, with savage pathos. Life was over for this man.When he got to the shore he stood staring at some washing spread upon the grey beach: it looked like a Roman pavement.He walked on and was at last alone. On his right was the sea, from which rose up the craggy broken headlands, with deep water thundering at their feet.He said to himself that he would sit on the edge of the rocks and watch the deep water, violet and green, with its ribbons and masses of seaweed. He would sit alone and stare and would hug his darling; the darling in his pocket, his invention.He was picking his way across the ledges of slippery rock, when he heard steps behind him and, turning, saw Curnow, with uneasy face and pleading eyes."I got Richard-John to bed," he shouted, "with a poultice on his stomach. You heard what the old girl said about washing?""Horrible!" interpolated Trewhella fastidiously and scowling—for he wished Curnow anywhere else!"Yet," the doctor continued, "her house is clean as a new pin, although she's close on ninety. Richard-John's bed, white—like the top of that wave!"He pointed to the sea and walked along beside Trewhella, who was making for the highest point. The line of tooth-like rocks curved away in distance towards Land's End. And, if you looked the other way, there was the gay town; the faces of the crooked, jostling old houses delicately colour-washed in green or pink or yellow."I've got a devil of a headache," said Curnow. "The sea breeze will do it good. Getting up so early did it.""Why did you get up so early?"Curnow did not answer until they were at the edge. Then he flung himself down, letting his big body go prone. Trewhella, neat, tense and bolt upright, sat beside him."I went to see Rebecca Hamlyn," said Curnow, "your Rebecca, isn't she? I meant to ask her to marry me. I thought I would ask her in her garden where she works early every morning. I met her mother instead and she sent me away. She gave me to understand that——!""Yes?" asked Trewhella."That Rebecca didn't want me and never would. I learn now from your lips that she wants you. I guessed it long ago and yet I wouldn't own it to myself.""Yes," Trewhella laughed, "she wants me."The doctor looked at his sharp jaw and sardonic mouth."She wants you," he said, "yet I want her more than any of the three of us wants anything. She's the only thing I'm alive for."The sea was talking far beneath their feet as they sat up high in the bright sun: broken waters boiled upon the narrow beach; they flung themselves in a mighty petulance against the immovable rock. These two men looked out to sea; blindly, at the brilliant ocean.Curnow's flabby body quivered and his eyes woke up."By God, I want her more than you do," he said fervently. "She is all I want. I've felt it for years, before she was grown up—and she's not twenty yet. Her red head! I was looking for it through the red and yellow flowers this morning—and then her mother came. Her mother sent me away."Trewhella never answered; he appeared to be thinking of something else."Those eyes of hers! Slantwise sort of eyes," rhapsodised Curnow. "And her long red mouth that kisses!""Kisses!" repeated Trewhella, looking round."Not my mouth. Don't be afraid. But she can kiss. And she has kissed you, Trewhella.""Last night," admitted Trewhella, flushing deeply. "This isn't seemly, Curnow.""Don't suppose it is." Curnow sat up. "I'm not in a nice mood for nice speeches. I say this morning what comes uppermost. You must forgive me and rest assured that I'll not trespass so deeply on your courtesy again. When are you going to be married?"He spoke in a sheer hotch-potch of intonation; confusing his melancholy mood with the stilted diction of his period."August," Trewhella told him. "They will both live—she and her mother—with me in the Rectory. We settled that last night after supper. I proposed and was accepted before supper.""Comfortable routine! Better than my unseemly, hungry wooing; six o'clock in the morning!" said Curnow.Trewhella looked into his blue eyes. They were savage and wretched and amused."Do you mean to say," Curnow continued, "that you want them both under your roof—from the first? You don't want Rebecca to cuddle up, to hide from the world; in a cave as it were—for six months or more?""No. I don't demand that," said Trewhella coldly.He was repelled. He was as he had been last night when in a polished sentence he asked Rebecca to be his wife, and she, for sole answer, had let her lip, thick and red, hold fast to his.Curnow repeated, his loose face grown yellow, to match the stubble of his new beard:"I want her more than you do and I can't have her. But she will never be yours.""Not mine! I don't apprehend——""Oh you will marry her. You will call her Becky, as her mother calls her. She will bear your children. But you will go to the grave and you will have missed. There's a rare joy for men and for women. The world holds it. You won't have it. Lordy—as Mrs. Henry Ivery said just now—what I could give Rebecca, were she my bride! But she doesn't want me. It is you she will have. Let her think she's got you, poor fool.""Am I the poor fool?"Trewhella, asking this, was looking at his neighbour with amazement, with prudery, with distrust. Curnow had taken too much port. This was disgraceful in a professional man; so early in the day."You will both be fools," said Curnow contemptuously, and looking straight out to sea he sent his wretchedness in one compressed glance towards an unseen shore."That's the way of it," he added. "There is the big bliss; very few taste it. Some are never hungry, some are hungry all their lives. Some get a bite and then the cupboard is locked.""Locks can be picked," Trewhella carelessly humoured him. "I'd undertake to stay any hunger I felt."He spoke indifferently but his face became darkly crimson: for he was reflecting that there was one hunger in the world that he did feel and that was the hunger for Fame. The craving to lift himself out from the ruck of men had been born with him. To satisfy it, he would certainly stop at nothing."I'm not a locksmith," Curnow said. 'Too idle by constitution to take up a new trade. Don't fear that I shall contest Rebecca with you.""Exactly. The very thing—that inertia—which keeps you from shaving"—Trewhella glanced at the sandy cheeks which so revolted him—"would keep you from learning how to pick locks.""Very likely." Curnow looked dull. "Meanwhile, you'll have Rebecca and Rebecca will believe she's got you. I must try for another consolation."He put his hand up to his breast pocket. Trewhella alertly watched him."What do you make of all this?" Curnow brought out a careless fat bundle of paper tied round with tape. "I've been amusing myself for months—trying to forget Rebecca; knowing in my heart that I should never get her. I've been essaying to forget a woman in an invention."He untied the pink tape and spread his stray bits of paper out upon his fat legs. Trewhella, bending hotly over, saw pencil scribbles and measurements and plans and sketches and rough marginal notes."Good God!"This is what his soul most piteously said. His lips remained rigid; they grew dry and cruel.He comprehended; just looking at those notes of Curnow's. He had been forestalled. Curnow had stumbled upon the same idea; he had developed it more."There they are, Trewhella," he took the sheets of paper and spread them out more. "It ought to revolutionise mining; unless I've overlooked something. Men do very often; when they are inventing something radical or when they plot a crime. There may be some flaw. Let's discuss it. See if you can find a flaw. It ought to make a fortune for me and send the name of Curnow sounding down the ages. Not that I care; I went to see Botallack last night. While you," his lazy voice and heavy eyelids lifted, "were kissing Rebecca Hamlyn I was propounding this idea to Botallack. It inflamed him. His enthusiasm amused me. For what do I care? Wouldn't I rather have Rebecca in my arms—in my arms and all mine, if only for an hour—than all of it? What is fortune and what is making a bit of noise in the news sheet and what is having your name repeated by new lips when you are dead? What is it compared to love and a woman? Botallack declares I shall get it all and more. Yet I swear to you, Trewhella, and you haven't married Rebecca yet; when you have I will keep silence—I swear to you, then, that I would rather have her alone for a day and a night on our bracken-covered hills than any of it. Dear God! To have her alone for a day upon Rosewall!"He looked passionately backward; inland, towards the great hills. He was transformed."And a night," added Trewhella, with fatal intonation.Yet he was not jealous, not he! Not a bit."And a night—yes," confessed Curnow—and he whispered it."Men have said that so often—dead men. Living men are saying it now, or said it last year," Trewhella told him. "Men say it. Then they get the woman. They esteem her lightly; they may even let her go. This love! What a bubble it is! What a ball of foam! That for your day and night rapture upon Rosewall."Trewhella was snapping his fingers."Well! She's going to be yours." Curnow looked down at his papers.His voice sounded so stubbornly desolate; it sounded—Trewhella fantastically thought, so cold and greasy.Trewhella sat still. In this great moment—after shock and before action—he sat still; calmly dissecting the essential differences between him and Curnow.Curnow could flame—for a woman. He was carelessly sardonic when it came to his invention.Now he, Trewhella, would barter Rebecca without one pang, he would forswear women altogether if he could be sure now for a tenth of that Fame which he had counted so fully upon only half an hour back."Allow me to look at those papers." He spoke politely and stretched out his hand."Certainly. I ask you to." Curnow handed them over. "Only copies. Botallack has the originals."Trewhella took those notes, his high pulses dying. He studied them. Yes, it was his idea but it was better in detail, it was fuller and more brilliant in conception. It was altogether more bold and marketable. He could not find a flaw. There was nothing; no little thing to give him the advantage over Curnow."Very interesting, very clever," he said mechanically, turning the sheets over faster and faster, bending to them, gluing his eyes upon them."You didn't expect anything so original from me, did you?" The doctor's voice was indolent. "From me! With my fatal lapse—of sometimes not troubling to shave!"Trewhella said, sidling close to him and holding the papers fast,"No. I didn't expect it of you. How did it occur to your mind?""Inspiration, magic; one of those things you can't do twice," explained Curnow. "Born of my sickness for Rebecca, without doubt. Love had to force a way through and it took the odd form of an improvement in the mining of tin!"He laughed wretchedly."Mining, just digging in the earth for metal," Trewhella told him didactically, "will last longer than love. There is eternal glamour to it. I can imagine a world, ages hence, when men will not be drawn towards women, nor women sicken for men; when children won't be born and the world will be waning. Life will be more chill, more wholesome, more large. And men will dig for metal just as they do now. Science will long outlive Romance.""Men will dig for metal, love will be dead and the name of Curnow will be upon all those prudent lips that are left. Is that it, Trewhella?""The name of Curnow! By Heaven, it won't be Curnow," shouted Trewhella—for control left him.He leapt to his feet. Curnow remained seated."Why won't it be Curnow, my dear fellow?" he asked indifferently. "Botallack can't steal it, for I've secured myself. Botallack is a local authority but I have laid my scheme before a man in London also—a bigger man in the mining world even than Botallack. A Scotchman, Ferguson by name. And I have his acknowledgment.""In your pocket?"Trewhella, asking this, sat down. He composed himself."No. In my desk at home. Two copies of the plans; one in London, one in the keeping of Botallack; also the rough copies which you hold.""You've been active," Trewhella said."I didn't care about it much," confessed Curnow. "But it was born of my pain over Rebecca; so I wished to father it myself. As to the money! I consider it half hers. Let me be," he swallowed fast, "godfather to your first-born. I undertake to provide for him handsomely.""My first-born," cried Trewhella, and his nervous laugh ran along the rocks. "Look here! You take her.""Take! Rebecca!""Yes. You want her. I can wed as conveniently elsewhere. There is the Rector of Towednack's sister. I'll ask her. It shall be arranged between us, sitting here as we do now, Curnow. Take her, take Rebecca: red head, slantwise eyes, red mouth. Lead her to the top of Rosewall and stay there if you choose."He laughed again. His hands, small and strong and dark-skinned, held Curnow's papers tight.Curnow grew colourless. He could not speak. Rebecca! Yet he would never take her. The woman he loved should give herself. She should even come and ask.When Trewhella spoke again it was with an actual sob."Look here," he said brokenly, "look here. I want to tell you something, I must show you something, Curnow."Yet his hands never moved to his breast pocket where the darling of his brain lay. For he felt, throughout, the haughtiness of the creator. His scheme, inferior as it was to Curnow's, yet remained sacred and, proudly, he would not show it. By God! But he would not."Look here," he said again, "look here": he sobbed and he spoke together, and he showed nothing.The noises he made were horrible, and horrible was the look upon his face. Curnow beheld molten emotion pouring from a dry man. Then he saw Trewhella jump up and go to the edge of the rock. He went so near the edge that, had he not been a Cornishman, he might have gone over—and he would have gone to a certain death in those deep waters, in that strong, outflowing tide.He came back."Can anybody hear us?" he asked wildly. "This is confidential, mind.""The rocks are honeycombed with pockets and scored by ledges," said Curnow, "but your only eavesdropper would be a mountain goat—unless it was Rebecca! I've seen her climb inaccessible places; yes, with all those petticoats!"Passion sounded through his voice again; coming in a quick laugh, running fast away!"The water makes such a noise," Trewhella spoke. "Nobody could hear us. Look here, Curnow, look here!"His face was mad."What's the matter with you?" Curnow got up on his feet and faced him and shook his arm.Trewhella struggled dangerously."You shan't push me over, Curnow, although you are the bigger man. I've thought of that.""I want to keep you from falling over. Give me back those papers and let us go back," Curnow said quietly. "Come away from the sea and as we walk towards your house tell me why you wished to barter Rebecca.""Yes, take her," besought Trewhella, standing fast where he was. "Only give me these."With passion—knowing passion now, for the first time—he pressed those papers of Curnow's to his mouth. Then he drew them down, remarking calmly,"I am beside myself. Can't you compose me? You—a doctor!"He was ashamed. He seemed to be some conscientious man emerging from excess."Not till I learn your malady. Come now, come. Give me those papers and let us go away."Curnow held his wrists; noting them as burning and lean and strong. He tried to pull him inland, without impression. These little men, how muscular they were!''You can have Rebecca.'' Trewhella stood firm and looked him full in the eyes. "Think what that means to a man of your blood! Only give me the right to these. Come with me to Botallack to-night. We'll explain to him that you chose—by caprice, through arrangement with me; anything we settle on between us, Curnow,—to pretend that this invention was yours—when it was mine; solely mine.""So that's it?" Curnow was amazed: his voice and his face seemed to say, 'Is that all?'"Yes, that's all." Trewhella looked at him in frenzied eagerness. "You can have Rebecca. Any other female image will do for me to set up in my Rectory.""Rebecca!" Something marvellous stole into Curnow's sleepy eyes. "Her superb red hair!""All yours—every hair. All yours—every kiss, Curnow."Trewhella came nearer to him and as they both moved so they both, unperceiving, got nearer the edge of the rock again."If you were to preach like that, if you were to look like that when you preach," said Curnow, trying to calm him, trying to calm himself—for through each 01 them rushed a fever—" you'd fill your church and empty the chapels. You'd rout the shades of Calvin and John Wesley. Why don't you preach like that, Trewhella?""Preach! I never wanted to be a clergyman; my family urged it on me. By Heaven! Had I been miner, did I stand in Botallack's shoes, and so understand all mining operations, you never would have forestalled me.""Forestalled you!"The light rushed in upon Curnow."So you got the idea also?" he asked. "Astonishing!""In my breast pocket." Trewhella, whimpering yet glowing, touched it. "I was going to Botallack to-night.""Let me look," said Curnow simply and holding out his hand."No." Trewhella's own hand flattened and tightened at his breast. "You shan't look."For to him those poor notes were very sacred. He said so."They are sacred to me—as Rebecca is to you. Understand?"He spoke with a wild uplifting. Curnow—wild also—met his look. They were no ordinary men, standing there through those last moments."I understand. Rebecca is a key to my understanding," Curnow said."You'll come with me to Botallack to-night," Trewhella pleaded. "You'll say that the idea is mine? I beseech you. I will give you the money but let the credit be mine. I've dreamed upon it, dwelt upon it; the thing is in my veins. Take Rebecca and be——""Damned," concluded Curnow. "That wasn't the word you meant, yet it would express us. No. I won't take Rebecca even if she would have me. And she might, were the whole position put to her: women have done more than that for the man they love—and she loves you. But a woman isn't a bale of wool to be bartered. She's flesh and blood; fair flesh and hot blood—when it comes to Rebecca. She'd make any sacrifice, go to any excess, triumph over all trials. There is strong life in her and glory and—perhaps—a touch of madness too: enough—just that pinch—to make her wholly entrancing."His voice sounded strange; it was active, heated and alive—unlike Curnow!"What are you talking about?" Trewhella was distant, perplexed and weary. "You'll take her?""No, then, I won't. What do I want with a woman who doesn't want me? I love her too well love my love for her too well. Do you comprehend?""Not a bit—nor do I care. Women! Women! They distract and weaken a man. Your face is silly with softness now, Curnow.""Do I want a wife," demanded Curnow, not heeding him, "who is sick through my every caress; sick in her inmost heart for another man? I might stand that if I didn't love her. But when I do! Give me back the papers."Again he put his hand out—for his own notes and not Trewhella's—again not perceiving they went nearer the edge."You!" said Trewhella, measuring him with a mad eye—small, dark and twinkling—"are a bigger man than I. But! Oh go! There!"He flung out his arms, with hands doubled, suddenly against Curnow's breast, he pushed the inert man over, with barely an effort. He felt the softness, the surprise, the swift terror, the unawareness of that big body—and then it was gone! He stood looking at the blank spot where, lately, Curnow had been.It was over, the thing was done and so easily. Curnow's notes were still in his hand. He would, he was thinking fast, copy them out in his own writing, he would take them to Botallack, he would compose a story. He would do it all with extreme care and as if he composed his Sunday sermon. The doctrine of it should be indisputable; he would take to Botallack to-night a narrative that was invulnerable. The theology of his immense lie should be perfect. He would convince both Botallack down here and the Scotchman in London. If they refused to be convinced he would push them into the sea. For it was uncommonly easy to rid yourself of people.Curnow was gone into the sea. Trewhella stared at the blank spot where he had stood. It had been so sudden and so easy. Curnow, slow to think, sluggish to move, had been taken unawares. He was down there at the bottom; dashed to pieces on the rocks in all probability and certainly by now sucked out to sea by the strong Atlantic rollers.No need to look for him, although Trewhella would not have shrunk from looking. He knew neither horror nor fear; he experienced only relief. And his brain was working in a clear mechanical frenzy while he settled what he must do.He remembered the many people who had seen him part from Curnow near the Digey. When, later, Curnow overtook him it had been upon the lonely path along the coast with not a soul to see.Trewhella stood still with the sound of the sea in his ears, with the prevalent colour of the blossoming land and the many hues of the town burning into his eyes.The little town! It seemed to sit upon the water like a gay-plumaged sea fowl. The little town with its softly swaying circle of fishing smacks, with its irregular houses washed green or pink or yellow; Along the crooked streets and funny alleys, in all the houses; in boats—as men mended their nets or hurried alone the quay in the autumn evenings, lighting their lamps before the herring fleet went out—in the places where old men stood to catch the sun, or where women spread their washing;—in all these places they would very soon be talking of him and his invention. And not only this generation but those to follow. Men and women not yet born, fishing smacks not built, nor nets made, nor washing stuffs woven—it would all hear of him. The name of Trewhella! What a name it would be! And not only in Cornwall, but in every place where men mined. The glamour of digging in the earth for metal was it not everlasting? To have his name go down, to lift himself out from the seething mass of common men, who merely laboured, lived, died, and were forgotten—this is what he had wanted ever since he had strength to think and contrive. Just pushing Curnow over the edge just now what a bagatelle it was by comparison!He must go home; yes he would go home quietly across the fields and up the lane. He would shut himself into his study and make Curnow's notes afresh. After tea he would go to Botallack. When he returned from Botallack he would go and court Rebecca.He turned his face towards the lane and as he did so he was thinking that all the way along the lane he would see the Rosewall hill in front; with its flowers and its juicy-fronded bracken. That was the hill where Curnow had prayed to be with Rebecca alone. Trewhella felt no jealousy: not now when Curnow was drawn out to sea, not ten minutes back when Curnow had said it.Rebecca was fractional in his calculations.Rebecca! He could hear her feet behind him. He stood still, he turned round and he saw her.She was dressed, although he would never be the lover to notice this, with delicious coquetry. Anyone skilled in this affair of love would have divined that when she dressed that morning there had been passion and joy to the tying of all her bows. Yes: she had been rapt when she arose and rapt when she left home at her mother's bidding to shop in the town.Trewhella stood staring. Over her coquetry was spread an abiding horror. She was changed and new; he marked that. He was impressed chiefly by the terrible repose of her face and the prevalent yellow. Her skin looked as if the sun fell strong on it. She gazed at Trewhella with her small dark eyes and they froze him. He put his hands together, holding Curnow's notes in a prayer-like clasp."I saw," she said. "John! I saw what you did."Their two pairs of eyes, small, set close, and very bright, held each other. Their eyes were alike; the same Cornish blood mixed with some foreign flavour was in them both.Trewhella was thinking of what Curnow had said, 'Her eyes—slantwise!' Curnow would never speak again.Against the yellow of Rebecca's skin, against the compressed brilliance of her dark eyes, how dull her red hair seemed! Masses of it, heavy and flat, looping round her delicate ears, falling away in a great bunch beneath the curtain of her bonnet.Her veil was flung back and the fine blond lace softly blew; her stiff petticoats spread round her; her shawl was fastened with a brooch of Cornish serpentine stone, set in a filigree of silver."I saw," she repeated. "You pushed him over. I looked down. The waves took him out to sea.""Where were you?" asked Trewhella dryly."Sitting, before you came, quite close; yet you couldn't see me.""You heard what we said?""Not a word. I waited for him to go away; I never liked him and I wanted you. I wanted you to——""Well?""Hold me as you did last night," she confessed in grim tumult."Yes! Well! Continue.""You seemed to quarrel. I looked round the bit of rock that hid me. You pushed him. He went over.""What are you going to do, Rebecca?"She looked at him. All her love—strong, amazing, irresponsible—struggled on her face. All her horror stamped upon the love and tried, quite in vain, to destroy it."I ought to have you hanged. I could. It would be the pious and the just thing to do.""Well, and what will you do?"He put his questions coldly."No woman," she said, "has loved as I love you, has wanted as I want you. It isn't maidenly, but it is my way; Spanish blood in both of us, John, making us violent; this way or that way."She waited for him to speak but he said nothing."Yet I chilled you last night—for your way isn't love. What it is, I don't know and I never shall. I cared for nothing except to have you for my husband. When I was a little girl and sat beside my mother in the pew and looked at you and heard you preach I used to think, 'He shall be my husband when I grow up.' I made things come that way, for a woman can. And yet I know that there is nothing in you that II love. You are the vessel into which I pour—that's all."Her head fell. Trewhella noted the great length of her black lashes and the arrogant curling. He looked from her lashes to her mouth; astonishing passion was dying hard upon it. She looked up at last."There was a woman living in the town," she said more quietly, "an old woman; she died not long ago. She gave up her only son to the hangman; although it was a murder he committed for her sake.""Joanna Berriman. I presided at her death-bed," said Trewhella. "An old story.""But the same agonies come round again, John. If we'd been married and had children I could never have loved them as I love you. No! Not to the gibbet. I can't send you there.""You can't send me there?"He spoke with a certain jubilation and he looked more animated. Sweat that had gathered on his forehead ran a little way, then stood upon his cheeks and made them shine."You'll let me go quietly home, Rebecca," he moved inland looking relieved. "You'll say nothing?"She followed him mutely."You'll marry me." He turned round to look at her. "You'll marry me, Rebecca?""Marry you! A murderer breathing beside me all the night. No, I'll never marry you. I'll never see you or touch you any more. Leave St. Ives, get out of England, never come back. However old we live to be, don't let me see your face again. Go to-night or I will deliver you to justice."Trewhella went up close; he touched her shawl, he put one hand—the other held Curnow's papers—upon the brooch at her breast, his clammy dark face besought her. With all the cunning he could muster, with all the warmth he could express, his eyes tried to woo her as they had wooed last night.Rebecca started from him, violently trembling."Don't touch me, don't touch me," she said loudly."If you put your face near mine I go straight to the town for a constable. You might madden me—yes—just for a minute—if you kissed me as you kissed last night, but when you let me go I would run into the town. They would hang you upon my witness. If you value life, keep your hands off me. Not one touch more between us in this world. You must go.""Go! Where?""Over the edge—as he went! Or in a ship—to some foreign port. Choose your own way," she told him recklessly. "To-morrow morning I shall come round to your house, I shall look through your study window. If you haven't gone, I shall give you up. I swear I will and yet I do love you. Nothing, no crime you can commit, kills that."Her voice moaned more than the sea.They had walked on to the opening of the winding lane, with the pink and white thorn trees and the radiant hedgerows; with a big hill, green and high, at the end; with a stone house and a quiet study tucked away behind the graceful fuchsia bushes."I'll go," Trewhella was sounding sick, "I'll go."He moved along towards the mouth of the lane. Rebecca stood still.He turned round and looked at her; their last look and they knew it. More often, men and women do not know."You are not coming?" he asked her nervously.Her lip twisted, with a broken, tender scorn of him, as she marked that furtive look."Don't you be afraid. Trust me—until to-morrow morning. I'm going into the town. Mother sent me, for saffron cakes."She rounded off these words with an ironic laugh and she brusquely turned away.Trewhella did not watch her go, he did not mark her looking back nor her standing still.He went off, feeling feebly glad to be rid of her; since, just as last night, her superb candour estranged him.They walked from each other through the dissolute colour of the summer day. He returned frenzied and stunned to his Rectory. Before he got to the end of the lane he had half forgotten Rebecca, with her dull red hair and her volcanic admissions. He began to think and plot and plan, he touched his breast pocket. And he quickened his step, for he was terribly afraid of the hangman's rope and he knew that she would keep her word.She watched him out of sight. He was only a little black blot crawling across the drunken colour of the day. And yet how much those blots meant! One more than another.When he was gone, when she knew that she would never see him again, famine shook her. Never would she see him any more. He was her betrothed, he had wooed her last night.She stood perfectly still for a long, long time, and perfectly alone. Trewhella was moving fast in his orderly study, Curnow was sailing out to sea. Not a living soul was in sight. She looked at the blue water, she looked at the grim rocks.She thought of the hundreds of days when she would come down here—for of two things she felt certain: that she would live to be old, that she would not leave this coast and live elsewhere. She settled her life for herself; as women, strong and imaginative, love to do. Mostly, they are wrong in the estimate: life gives more or charges less.There would be days when she would come down here alone; and think of him and call across the sea to him, saying, 'John.'Summer days, as this day; pink-blossomed and warm. Or winter days of mist and storm; with the wild wind and the great waves; with the doleful sound of the fog-horn, with the blowing steaming cattle and the dripping thorn bushes and the moaning sea."I shall come," she said, moving at last, going to the town for cake, "yes, married or single, I shall come."She could say coolly that 'married or single.' Great pain gave her great illumination and she divined the twists and changes that a woman's heart may take; she cynically admitted the claims that might come—and the partial consolations. Yet the one clear fact of true love was changeless; not to be diverted or consoled. She loved John; and complete happiness was never—any more.CHAPTER IA MAN, carrying a big cardboard box, walked through the rain, from Oxford Circus, going eastwards. He was little and dark, with a long head, upon which the fine hair grew close and black as satin. His small black eyes, set close together, were steadfast and quiet—yet they held hints of things that were not so quiet.All that he passed he saw—with that intuitive quality which is more than mere seeing. For him, there was often confession on the faces of passers-by; there was joy and grief and secrecy and guilt—they were not just faces, and these were not merely wet people hurrying home. He divined in some measure what they were and to what they were hurrying. He could—with this thoughtful vision of his—open the doors of homes and look inside. He went on, delighted with his impressions, glowing with his thoughts and, already, turning his thoughts into ready-money: into more than money—into Fame! That was what he had come to London for.Yes, here he was, bent upon the same old stupid quest. He had come to London to be famous. Through this New Year of 1912 he meant to force himself upon London. John-Andrew Vaguener! He could see his name in big letters and see it everywhere.Jane would laugh at him; she,would chill him, she would stare. She would threaten him with the material outlook. Yet he did not care for Jane and her opinions, except in so far as you are constrained to care for the views of a person upon whom you propose to live. He smiled softly as he walked through the rain, as he studied the fast-flitting people under their gleaming umbrellas. Poor industrious, commonplace Jane! Jane—vulgar, affectionate, and genuine! He would have to live upon her—but only for a little while. He thought it was an idea to make a business proposition to his sister at the start. He would say to her directly he got inside her sitting-room, directly family greetings were exchanged, "Jane, let this be a business arrangement. Put down every penny that I cost you and before long I will pay it back with a six per cent interest." That was fair, it was generous.Dear Jane, with her staring eyes and her short neck; Jane, with her noisy voice and kind heart—she was sitting by the fire now, waiting for him, and with something hot for tea.He dawdled on, delighting in the rosy look of the wet asphalt road, when light from the shop lamps fell upon it. He gazed through the dirty rain with perpetual savour.Yes! London was the place.He thought, with dreary resentment, of the Thames Valley and the rambling stucco house he had just left. He would never set foot in it again, nor in one like it. He would starve first or he would live upon Jane.He thought also of Cornwall, for he was a Cornish-man. He had not seen St. Ives for years and he hoped he might never see it again. It was too wild, too far removed from the heart of things. It was too small. You met the same people in the same streets. You might as well live on board ship and pace a deck. Yet it held him, his birthplace. He dwelt upon the vivid melancholy of it; the lavishness of its summer blooming, the gauntness of its autumn storms. He felt himself a boy again, walking in the soft, constantly streaming rain and the wild warm wind of October; going from the Rectory where he had been born, and down the Stennack to the town. He could see the carts rock recklessly across the steep street and hear the shouts of the drivers and hear the rattle-tattle of the mine. He could see the small grey houses, with firelight in the rooms and washing hanging across the rafters. It all came back; the colour and the isolation; the implied despair of that place and the wonderful beauty.Then he pulled himself up, for he stood at the entrance gate of Gray's Inn.He went under the arch in the sudden darkness, he stood in South Square. Looking up at Jane's window on the third floor, he saw that she had not drawn down the blinds. Firelight jigged about.He went in at the open doorway of Number 6. He looked at the names which were painted up. Third floor. MR. ARNOLD BUTTIFANT. That was one set and he did not care who Buttifant was. The other set was Jane's. Miss J. VAGUENER. She must have that altered. They must paint anew JOHN-ANDREW VAGUENER, ESQ., MISS VAGUENER. He supposed that Jane would insist upon her name remaining. She was so self-assertive.He looked before he went inside at the grass sown in the middle of the Square. He had always resented this finished touch, this recent attempt at the pensive quiet of a Cathedral Close. They were trying to make a backwater of the place; whereas it stood for the roaring torrent. Gray's Inn was the place where he would struggle and achieve. His dark face, little and lean, fired.He went up the wide stairway; dirty, wooden, dimly lighted. At Jane's set the oak was back and the inner door boasted a neat brass knocker brightly polished. He knocked and a woman opened. She said that Miss Vaguener was in and, going before him, opened the sitting-room door. Then she went actively back into her lighted kitchen and he smelt the good smell of hot toast.He set down his cardboard box in the passage and then he went into the firelit sitting-room, where shabbiness was softened in the gentle light. It was a fair-sized room, panelled to the ceiling and with a heavy wooden cornice, the whole painted a cool stone colour. There was a wide fireplace with a high mantel-shelf above, the grate was old, with waving bars and pretty hobs. The proportion of the place was tranquillising. John-Andrew Vaguener felt cooled and steadied directly he entered, every aggravating detail was blurred.Jane got up from her chair by the fire. She put her arms round him; her fat arms in the thin blouse."Good old Johnny," she said affectionately. "So you've come back.""Yes, I've come back; like a bad penny, Jane.""I didn't say a bad penny," she remonstrated in a high voice, yet following the words with the gentlest sigh. "And now," she had his arm and was pulling him towards the fire, "let me introduce our neighbour, Mr. Buttifant. He has the set on the other side of the passage. My brother, Mr. Buttifant."Jane had roomy chairs each side of the fireplace and Buttifant had been buried in his. Bad taste of Jane—obtuse and just like her, poor soul, to have a visitor when he arrived! For he wanted to tell her and at once why he had left Taplow and what a lot he had been constrained to put up with. But he was civil to Buttifant and he sat down in the middle between him and Jane."I'll light the gas," said Jane. "It's early for gas but we can't have tea in the dark. You'll stay to tea, Mr. Buttifant?""Sorry. I can't. I must do some work to-night. I ought to be doing it now.""Awfully bad for your eyes; that fine black and white stuff by gaslight," said Jane. "If you won't stay, I'll tell her not to bring the tea in for ten minutes. You can spare that for a chat."She went bustling out. Her brother watched her. How she combed up your nerves, poor girl! Everything about Jane was high and brightly coloured and thick. Her waist was thick and her neck was thick; he felt sure that her ankles were abominably thick. I his did not matter to him; being a brother he need not make love to her. Moreover, he was quite sure that no man would wish to make love to her. She stood outside that kind of thing, altogether; just as he stood himself. Into the mixture which had been moulded into him and Jane, a tincture of celibacy had been dropped. It curdled and flavoured them.He turned to look at Buttifant. He was curious about this man; he wanted to strike a match and see him better. The firelight was good enough. It showed him a small fellow; thirty perhaps. He was fair and, already, his carefully brushed hair was thin to streaky. He had a pale face, so expressionless that Vaguener compared it to a sheet of new blotting-paper. When he spoke he, by the raising of dun brows and the humorous twisting of a clean-shaved mouth, summoned expression and Vaguener saw what he chose to consider the inky markings on the blotting-paper. For the rest, he had a singularly agreeable voice. Vaguener was critical with voices, because he had lived through his nursery days and beyond them with Jane's metallic, exhausting soprano."Horrible day," said Buttifant melodiously."I liked it, coming up Oxford Street," returnee Vaguener. "I haven't been in London for some time.""I wish I was out of it for all time," said Buttifant."He's always saying that, Johnny," screamed1 Jane, rustling into her chair by the fire. "I've sent her away.""Her? Who?" asked Vaguener."My woman, Mrs. Welfare. She comes every morning; you must remember her. I kept her late to-day for your sake; to make toast and have things nice. I wanted to give you a special welcome."She put out her hand, which was plump and white, and squeezed her brother's."You are always saying that," she addressed Buttifant, "and I can't agree with you. It is nonsense to like the country better than London. Don't I know? Don't we both know, Johnny?" she laughed. "Do you remember St. Ives? And the awful sea and the empty hills and the lonely roads leading to nowhere and the grey farms and the stone cottages and the ugly chapels? Ugh! Makes me damp down my back to think of it."She poked the fire, making it run over their three faces."If you'd been born in the sort of country, Mr. Buttifant, we were, if you knew it, as we know it, you'd be grateful for a life in London, wouldn't he, Johnny?""I don't know. I liked it sometimes, I even loved it. And I remember it well," said Vaguener dreamily and turning aside from her.He did not want to look at Jane. He was thinking of St. Ives as he had known it in moments: the azure sea, the haunting caress of the air, the pinky look of the flowery land. South Square with a silly patch of new-sown grass was perhaps a poor makeshift.London was merely a jumping-off place and when you had achieved yourself you left!"He always goes," Jane was laughing and pointing to Buttifant, "into the country when he can. Don't you?""Always," said Buttifant solemnly. "Sussex on Sundays, that's my rule.""It's good for your work," Jane admitted."Mr. Buttifant is a black and white artist, Johnny. He has illustrated three of my serials."She spoke proudly, for she had an inordinate opinion of her work.The look that Vaguener shot at her was uncommonly like hate. For he did hate Jane's complacence and Jane's competence. She could make her living easily; I he had not succeeded in making his; he was always coming back to her and sponging upon her. Not only did she make her own living and—incidentally—his, but she made it in the way which he regarded as sacred. Jane took a holy thing an vulgarised it.That was Vaguener's exalted way of looking at literature. To him it was a spiritual craft; to Jane it was a way of getting her living, of growing fat, of dressing herself in abominably chosen clothes."Are you doing a serial now?" he asked stiffly."I'm doing two serials. Not many people can keep; two ideas running and keep them clear, can they, Mr. Buttifant?""Profitable energy!" sneered her brother.Jane looked pained. Buttifant gave Vaguener a look which Vaguener saw and wondered at.It was full of vigour and mysterious expression; it made blots upon his blotting-paper face.Had Jane been a pretty woman or even a plain woman with a pretty voice, you might have imagined that Buttifant was in love with her! For he looked defensive. It was a look of clenched fists."Was I unkind?" Vaguener asked his sister gently. "Forgive me, overlook it this once. Remember what a failure I am, what a regular bad hat. And then think of all your own successes.""Oh, I've got the trick," admitted Jane noisily. "But you'll be all right, Johnny. You'll get another post. I wouldn't waste time, I should go to the agency to-morrow."She spoke briskly. She was going to keep him up to the mark, for his own good. He knew her."We don't want to bore Mr. Buttifant with my affairs, Jane.""I must be going." Buttifant rose."No, you don't want to go yet. I've decided that you'll stay to tea." Jane gave him a clumsy friendly push and he allowed himself to sit down again. ' You can knock off those drawings to-morrow morning. Get up an hour earlier.""Yes; I can knock them off," he said ruefully. Vaguener surveyed him."Mr. Buttifant," said Jane, proudly exploiting her friend, "has more work than he can do. Haven't you?""Yes." Buttifant spoke to Vaguener. "I'm making money hand over hand. But every sovereign stings.""Stings! Oh you are funny," laughed Jane."Already," Buttifant was solemn, "I don't get the very best work. Already—and I'm only thirty! They pass me over; they know me for a hack. I've missed reputation and money won't last.""That's bad," said Vaguener honestly."How gloomy you two are! I shall light the gas." Jane lighted it.When the room was in a blinding glow they all blinked at each other and the same look of sickness and terror which had fallen upon Buttifant was reflected on Jane."Oh, Jane! You have spoiled the occasion by your incandescent devil." Vaguener shielded his eyes."That's another of his funny ways!" Jane shrugged her shoulders, making her neck shorter. "If he had his way he'd drink tea by one candle, wouldn't you, Johnny?""Yes, with a shade on it," said Vaguener."I'll get the toast and wet the tea." Jane went out of the room. "She said the toast wouldn't hurt in the oven.""I'm a schoolmaster," Vaguener told Buttifant when they were alone. "Classical master at Taplow was my last job, and I've lost it.""You don't mean to say they chucked you?" Jane was back with the toast. "You were so vague about it in your letter."She lifted the cover of the dish."It hasn't dried up. I love it all buttery and squelchy, don't you?" she twinkled at Buttifant. "And I've got some pastries, Johnny, from that place opposite Mudie's. You don't mean to say that those people at Taplow dared——""Oh no, I gave myself the determining touch. That's all right," said Vaguener."And of course you've got a quarter's notice? You'll go back after Christmas?" She sat down. "Bring up your chairs, the two of you."They came to her tea-table."I could have had a quarter's notice. I'm entitled to it, but——Shall I cut the bread, Jane?""No, don't you see there is toast, you dear old silly. Go on about Taplow.""I simply cannot endure another day of it. I've left for good.""For good! But where's your luggage?""Coming on by Carter Paterson. Never mind my luggage."I haven't the knack," Vaguener spoke to Buttifant, "of schoolmastering. I don't get on
with the head's wife and I'm no good at games and——""But you can't start a school of your own. You haven't any capital," said Jane. "And you haven't any connection. I don't know," she bit into her buttered toast and looked at him anxiously, "what is going to happen to you.""I do." Vaguener was instantly radiant. "Literature.""Oh!" Jane was cold. "Literature! ""Which is not interfering with you," Vaguener told her rudely."We never quarrel, Johnny and I, or I should be angry with him," Jane said to Buttifant. "He doesn't understand the technique of my work; he thinks I do it on my head, instead of out of it.""Head! You don't do it from your heart, Jane. That is all I mean.""Amateurs do it from the heart," said Jane scornfully. "Don't they, Mr. Buttifant? Come now! Stick up for me—and for yourself. We are both," she looked at him with a sad kindness,"in the same boat.""I think it comes from somewhere else—the abiding work—not from the head, not from the heart," returned Buttifant. "But it isn't worth thinking about. It's just one way of getting your living out of thousands of ways.""There I don't agree with you." Vaguener tempestuously emptied his teacup then stumped it down into the saucer.Buttifant and Jane smiled at each other.For they knew.Then Vaguener opened out. He talked to them. Jane put her elbows on the table and listened; she held triangles of hot toast in the air, biting infrequently; now and then sliding plates across the table towards the men. Or she took their cups and filled them silently. Her mouth was quivering.Vaguener looked alight. His topic made a shrine of him with candles burning. Buttifant looked at his lean face—savagely intent and queerly glowing; he regarded him with intelligent detachment. He said, interrupting:"I felt like that once. I was a drawing master at Malvern. One day I put a bundle of drawings under my arm and came to London.""Did you?" Vaguener turned to him warmly. "Then you understand what teaching means? It kills your soul.""No good having a fine lusty soul when your body's got nothing to eat," said Jane. "Have one of those spiky things, Johnny. There's cream inside.""Shove the plate along." Vaguener boisterously took one.They all laughed without reason. They were caught up in something; it was the gilded cloud of his rapture for writing."But I," Buttifant's voice was solemn and sweet, which was the quality of it, and whatever he said would have sounded the same, "left behind me at Malvern, a widowed mother and two small brothers. I'd been keeping the lot and I had to go on keeping them. I'm keeping them now.""That was courage," Vaguener said."It needs courage to burn your boats, Johnny, and it doesn't do to rely upon other people. If you two men don't want any more tea I'll have the last cup myself." Jane tilted her teapot."It turned out all right with you." Vaguener was staring at Buttifant."It turned out remarkably right; if you mean money—and getting a living is all that matters. But if I had only been able to study abroad and wait a little and give myself a chance, I could have got to the top of the tree. I'm only on a low branch with my toes scraping the earth.""You are at the top." Jane was brusque. "Everybody knows your name.""In certain quarters; but that isn't it," Buttifant was positive."My name," Vaguener burst out laughing and took his second pastry, "will resound in all the quarters. Wait a bit, Jane.""A play?" Buttifant looked at him."A play! He couldn't write a play." Jane was quick."No, no." Vaguener shook his head. "The drama makes no appeal to me. Poems.""My dear Johnny, you won't sell a sonnet in six months! You might make a bit if you could turn your hand to topical things for the——""Shut up, Jane."She laughed, and it went through his racked head."Dear old boy," she was shrill, yet she was pitiful. "you are talking rubbish. You haven't got the trick of writing and you never will have. Why you can't even write a good letter; you don't take up one's points. To-morrow morning after breakfast I shall bundle you off to the agency and you must get another school after Christmas. And save up—that's the way—and ingratiate yourself with people. Then you can have a school of your own some day.""Another way," said Buttifant, "is to marry a schoolmaster's widow.""Johnny and I never think of marriage. It isn't in us," said Jane simply."I don't believe it is." Buttifant fixed his intelligent pale eyes upon her face, with the common, good-tempered features."Celibacy is in our blood and that's a fact," said Vaguener."Johnny! Don't get on to the old story about our grandfather.""Your grandfather wasn't a celibate, anyway?" Buttifant's faint brows became quizzical."Haven't I ever told you the story?" Jane sat back in her chair—and her brother noticed how bad her figure was: bulging in the wrong places—and then the deplorable shortness of that neck!Jane irritated him by her very appearance. He wanted to take her body; pull it out, press it in and make it shapely. She should be gracious and dignified, the woman he proposed to live with! Jane was neither and never could be. She hadn't that mysterious gift which is called 'presence.'"Sometimes I thought I'd use it for a plot," she was saying to Buttifant, "and then it seemed so farfetched. Besides, it doesn't seem decent with your own family.""Body-snatching your own grandfather! Of course not," returned Buttifant.When he spoke to Jane his voice displayed lovely modulations which Vaguener delighted in. This man, Buttifant, could never be vulgar; Jane could never be anything else."But it is a remarkable story, Jane, and it bears strongly upon all I've been talking about," he said to her. "He was ambitious and so am I. He wouldn't let anyone get in his way and I'm hanged if I will either.""I should like to hear about him," said Buttifant."Yes, tell Mr. Buttifant, Johnny; you'll tell it best." Jane began to look interested. "I wonder," she spoke to Buttifant, " what you'll make of it and whether I could turn it into something. The illustrations would be good; 1850 dress, you know. You might like to do them. Yes, let's try to pull it off. Do. Begin, Johnny.""It's nothing very much." Vaguener took his third pastry."Twopence each and awfully rich," Jane told him frankly. "But you are never bilious although you always look it.""Yellow skins run in our family," Vaguener said."Yet mine is so fresh," returned Jane.She got up and looked at her face in the glass, for she was brim full of impulsive vanities."You don't see many complexions like mine in London," she said simply when she came back to the table. "I ought to clear away these things, but let's have grandfather first.""It was just this." Vaguener looked at Buttifant." A man got in his way and he killed him; he pushed him into the sea down there in Cornwall.""Love affair?" asked Buttifant."No, that's the funny part," Jane spoke quite eagerly, "there wasn't a woman in it. That is why I think it might be original. It might work up well; a thing without a love interest. And it would be nice to do, for I'm dead sick of love.""Ambition." Vaguener slid the plate of cakes across the table. "He had invented something and the other chap tumbled on the same idea and got in first. Our grandfather—his name was John Trewhella and he was Rector of a church down there——""But you were born down there?" Buttifant turned to Jane."Yes, same Rectory," she nodded. "Let Johnny explain.""He went abroad after the murder. He fell ill at a little inn——""Where was it, Johnny? I can't remember.""Switzerland, I think; doesn't matter. He got better and within six months he married the landlady.""Thought he was a celibate by instinct," Buttifant said."By instinct—yes. But when a man is weak and wants looking after." Vaguener became reflective. "I expect I should do the same.""I'm sure you would," chuckled Jane. "Look what you're doing now! Leaning hard up against me; though I don't mind.""He took his wife's name," Buttifant saw Vaguener's cheek quiver, "and it is her name twisted about, rolled on the British tongue, which we bear now and which our father bore. But we are really Trewhellas. He had a son and a daughter. The son, my father, was called John-Andrew; so am I. None of us can understand the Andrew. His daughter was Rebecca. That is our aunt and the mother of Kenneth and Becca. You'll hear about them by and by, if Jane hasn't told you already.""How did you know about the murder? It isn't a thing a man blabs.""When a man's weak he'll do anything." John-Andrew lifted his sensitive shoulders. "He was on his death-bed. If he had fled to a Catholic country, he would, at the last when the thing worried him, have confessed to a priest and there would have been an end: the seal of confession would have spared his descendants.""Cheated them," amended Jane, "for I may use the idea.""As it was," continued her brother, "he unburdened his soul to a Swiss pastor, who unburdened his to the nearest relative—my father. My father, equally scrupulous, solemnly uncovered the family skeleton when I was twenty-one. The Protestant conscience carries a great responsibility. Why couldn't the Swiss pastor have kept quiet?""Did he live to be old, your grandfather? Did he turn into an innkeeper?""He lived to be awfully old," said Jane. "And he led Aunt Rebecca who kept house for him out there in Switzerland a dreadful life. So she got married, she had to. She didn't want to; she's said so heaps of times. Her husband, Mr. Marshall, was a well-to-do bank manager, travelling for his health. He soon died—and then she came to England. She's settled down at St. Ives. She's quite Cornish, although she was born in Switzerland.""He didn't turn into an innkeeper; he left that to his wife. He developed a trick of making mechanical toys," said Vaguener, "and netted quite a little fortune. Then he got to know that the Cornish living was for sale——""The one he fled from after the murder?""Yes. And he bought the advowson for his son.""Your father?""Yes. He took it, married a Cornish girl and we were born at the Rectory, Jane and I.""Then father and mother died and Aunt Rebecca looked after us. Then John-Andrew went to Oxford and I couldn't stick St. Ives and came to London. So now you know all about us," said Jane to Buttifant, smiling at him squarely."Who's got the living now? Why haven't you? Buttifant asked Vaguener."I wouldn't go into the Church," Vaguener said, curtly and with a funny quick glare."Kenneth's got it." Jane sounded affectionate. "He's a dear old chap—and just like all the rest of us. Very ambitious and very full of common sense."When Jane said 'all the rest of us' she meant herself!"You were a fool to refuse the living, Johnny," she added. "You would have been provided for. That's the only thing that matters, isn't it, Mr. Buttifant?""Thought you were ambitious, Jane." Vaguener was lazily smiling."Well so I am, you stupid old Johnny: ambitious of a competence—a certain something rolling in every week.""A man with a penny account book at the back door every Saturday and you'd give him a receipt?" asked Buttifant, raising his effective pale brows and looking at her fondly."Yes, that's it." Her long sigh touched him. "Oh, wouldn't that be nice!"She got up, pushing back her chair. Then she smiled at Buttifant in her broad good-natured way."Aunt Rebecca's coming to London in the spring with her daughter. I'll introduce you; Becca's a dear little girl.""Don't like dear little girls.""What do you like?""Never mind; no good my saying.""Well, I do hope it isn't the dumpy woman you put in your drawings."Jane smoothed her plump arms in the transparent sleeves.Jane had a delusion—and it was one of many. She imagined herself tall and slim."The girl you draw," she continued, "is what your mother must have been when she was young, for your mother's fat, isn't she?""She is certainly well covered," Buttifant allowed—and his thoughts drifted away to a house in Dulwich where his mother—fat and captivating, with a trick of getting all she wanted—lived elegantly at his expense."It's improper to ask," Jane laughed, "but she doesn't wear stays, does she? I went to be fitted the other day. I'm very particular. And it does seem so odd to see yourself in a long glass; just in your hat and your other things.""I never asked her. Does it matter?""Not enough for her to think that I asked you. I'm very particular about my figure, that's all; and she doesn't seem to care. She doesn't do her clothes justice. It's a pity, considering what you spend.""She would be sorry to think you thought that."Buttifant was diplomatic and critical? He surveyed Jane—with her delusion of slimness and a good figure! Jane so atrociously put together! Jane whose clothes always looked as if they had been thrown at her haphazard from a bargain counter! Jane with her irrepressibility and her frenzy for the latest novelty. Jane who meant such a lot to his heart! Jane who, like all cold women, was often so unconsciously coarse!"The name Rebecca," she returned to the topic of her relatives, "always reminds me of that disagreeable old woman at Towednack. You remember, Johnny? The late Rector's widow, Mrs. Polmeor.""I remember—yes. She's a Rebecca too. Lots of them down there.""She was as old as the hills when we were there," Jane laughed. "I expect she's dead now, don't you?""No, she isn't dead." Vaguener was indifferent. "I had a letter from Becca when I was at Taplow. She'd met the old soul in her donkey chair along the Towednack road.""What's Becca doing writing to you? Funny child!" said Jane."I didn't know she was a child," said Buttifant."She's not too young for a heroine. We like them young, don't we?" Jane chaffed him. "She is nineteen. Why did she write to you, Johnny?""Sent me some photographs, that's all. Somebody gave her a camera for a birthday present. They were good photographs too: sea, mostly. And she wrote a queer enthusiastic letter.""I should like to see that letter.""My dear Jane, I burnt it.""That old woman at Towednack—what is her name, Johnny; Rebecca—what?""Polmeor.""Yes, that's it—Mrs. Polmeor, she used to make me shiver," Jane said. "Why is it that there is something so sinister about some old women? They say at St. Ives that she could tell tales about Dr. Curnow's murder if she chose.""Who is Dr. Curnow?" asked Buttifant. "This begins to look like a plot.""Curnow is the man our grandfather murdered," answered Vaguener with some rigour."You had better not use the plot either of you, for I might not like it."He looked dangerous."Or you might want to use it yourself." Jane was amused. "I should like to see a serial that you wrote, Johnny! It would be a funny bit of work. No construction, no curtains! There's a lot to learn.""I'm not likely to do that sort of work." Vaguener was disdainful. "I've got several things—poems and essays—ready to send out. Then I shall get some reviewing to do. And I shall get a ticket for the Museum Reading Room and do a little research."He went on talking, more to himself than to them. They exchanged glances; of amusement and sympathy. He sounded so old-fashioned and so leisurely. He was out of date.The scribbling and scratching life that they knew left no room either for research or thought. It was a hurly-burly and a hubble-bubble; it consisted in everybody tumbling over everybody else. It sometimes took even Jane's breath away. It depressed and exhausted her. On these occasions she sensibly put the cover on her typewriter, walked down Oxford Street and bought herself some clothes, whether she wanted them or not. If the same mood overtook Buttifant he went far into the country or he went down to Dulwich and talked to his mother. She was very reposeful and only eighteen years older than he was himself.Yet there was joy to the life and it certainly administered to Jane's vanity. She loved to have her photographs appear in magazines—and this had happened more than once. She made a point of writing letters to the newspapers upon any topic that was in vogue; for that sort of thing advertised you. Jane was hearty and vulgar and vain. She enjoyed her life; except in certain moods when queer terror came along. Then she grew frightened and wondered what would happen if she did not get any more commissions. Stars in the firmament had a way of dying out. She knew it and Buttifant knew it."I shan't use grandfather's story," she said to her brother, after a pause through which she had sat with her pale eyes with the sharp black pupils staring vacantly at the panelled wall," for there is no love interest. The public will have love—and I can make it!""You make it," Buttifant looked up from the table-cloth, where he had been drawing with his finger," but do real men and women make it your way? I'm not sure."'You must put it to the test some day," Jane said carelessly. " I don't care whether it is real or not. It sells."She got up.'You two men can help me clear the table."They each picked up something and carried it out of the kitchen, laughing and moving in a picnic spirit. John-Andrew looked about him gratefully; at the pretty arch in the passage, at the windows in their heavy frames, at the mouldings on the wooden walls. He was glad that Jane—quite by accident—had managed to rent one of the sets in the Inn that was unimproved and unspoiled. He was affected by his setting and he came to the conclusion that half his misery at Taplow had been caused by the large ex-crescent ugliness of the house. He could live at peace here and work well—if it were not for Jane!They packed together the dirty china and put the cakes away. In the passage, he said to his sister:"Turn the gas out in the sitting-room. Let's sit in firelight or with candles.""Firelight gives me the blues and I haven't got a candle in the place," Jane told him, "but I'll fix up something to soften the light. Why, what's this?" She saw the cardboard box. "It's from Peter Robinson's. Did you bring it, Johnny? What on earth have you been buying at Peter Robinson's?""Take it in the sitting-room. Open it and see," John-Andrew said.He looked at her in affectionate excitement. He had been waiting for her to find it.Her face grew greedy."Is it for me?" she said, speaking like a child. "Oh give me a knife, somebody. Let's cut the string."Buttifant had his knife ready. He held it out.Jane slashed at the string and took the lid off. When she saw tissue paper, she put the lid on again and carried the box ritually into the sitting-room. I The men stood round as she unpacked it on the table, She drew out—and it looked a purpled stream—an evening gown of lovely stuff. Underneath were stockings, long gloves and a fan."To go with it!" screamed Jane.Her face, always so nicely fresh, turned crimson. She hugged Vaguener."How good of you, John-Andrew." She was almost hysterical. "You really are a dear thoughtful gentle creature. I don't believe that one man in ten thousand would have thought of stockings too.""And got so good a match," added Buttifant.He had been standing by, watching them, aloof from this outburst of family feeling. He now took one of the webby purple stockings and ran his hand down the leg, spreading his fingers in the foot."May I?" he spoke very sweetly and smiled at Jane. "I love the fine feel of silk.""I can't let you feel it long, I'm going to take the whole kit into my bedroom and try it on. I just must."She fluttered her finery into the box, snatching the stocking from him. She said to Vaguener, "Johnny! I shall never forget this. I look my very best in violet. It brings out the fineness of my skin and suits my blue eyes."She picked up the box and went to her bedroom. The men sat listening to her slap-bang ways of dressing; bursting open drawers, swilling water, dropping things.She came back transformed. She had arranged her hair on the top of her head instead of rolling it in an untidy club at the nape of her neck. Her eyes were bright and happy and hard. Her cheeks were redder than her mouth, which was always pale.The violet frock was cut low and this made her neck seem longer. She had spoiled everything—for the fastidious—by sticking a great papery-looking artificial rose of a dreadful yellow at her waist. There was another one in her hair.She went and posed before Vaguener."Don't I look nice?""Extremely nice. Only the roses——"Jane shouted, "Yellow and violet are jolly together, aren't they, Mr. Buttifant? You know all about colour. Artists do.""You must let me think it out. Sit down and I'll look at you," said Buttifant.He felt as Vaguener felt: that those yellow roses were like eating sour apples. Jane sat down."It fits so well," she said. "How did you know the size, Johnny?""Thirty-eight inch bust," returned Vaguener, with promptitude. "Don't you remember the blouse you were trying to make by the aid of a paper pattern when I stayed here last?""I should think I did! Fancy you remembering. That was the time," she looked across at Buttifant, "when fashions in fiction were changing. I wondered if I could keep up. And I was afraid—you know how afraid we do get? So I started making my own clothes.""There is no fashion in literature," Vaguener I remarked haughtily."Poems and essays and that sort of leisurely stuff, perhaps not," Jane was cocksure. "But fiction—good wholesome family reading—is different.""He's right." Buttifant looked at Vaguener. "Fashions don't change, when you come to the things that tell. No fashion in art, no fashion in love; always the same and always solemn. I wonder," he looked at Jane, "if you could do your grandfather's story.""No. Must have a love interest." Jane was curt. She hated to be opposed."I suppose so." Buttifant hardly took his eyes off her. "There are worthy folk who would confine the interest in love to certain decades. They would cool the warm world to their own fish-like temperature. They are wrong—love is a thread that runs through the stuff; yes, even the stuff they make shrouds of.""Shrouds! How horrid of you! When I've got. on a new frock and when I've got in there," Jane jerked her head towards her roll-top desk between the two windows, "note-books stuffed with plots. Wonder if I shall do them all before I die! I should like to.""You love doing your work then?" Vaguener asked her very gravely."So long as it pays I do."She spoke stridently, she looked at him with a certain defiance; and there was something else behind it."'Don't you think," he smiled at her in his gentle lazy way—the way with an insolent flick, "that we might, when you are looking so delightful, turn out the gas and have a candle? Gas is always, to my mind, a squalid form of lighting. If they burned it in the Vatican I should feel the same.""How you do harp on the gas! I'll indulge you to-night if I can find a candle. But only to-night, John-Andrew. I always type from seven till nine and I must have a good light."She got up and rummaged in the drawers of her desk. She brought out a half-burned and guttery candle."How it got there goodness knows," she laughed as she pushed it into a candlestick on the mantelshelf. "Now then, a match, one of you, and the other can turn out the gas. Whenever I want any old odd thing I look in the drawers of my desk and it's there. I found a card of linen buttons yesterday."Vaguener spread his legs to the fire and set his shoulders back when he found himself sitting in a gentle light. He opened his eyes and shut them happily."Nothing like the aristocracy of candles," he said."A cheap way of getting on in the world," Jane answered."My dear girl, true aristocracy, of any sort, is always cheap."Buttifant's white vague face, kept—so Vaguener thought—blotting. He counted new blots. Candlelight did funny things with faces; candlelight and firelight together. It was all so much more subtle and redundant than a steady useful glare—some light by which you could do things instead of feeling and thinking them.Jane, lying in her deep chair and lapped by the waves of her violet splendour, looked nearly refined. If it were not for those roses!Buttifant got up quietly and leaned over her."Let me," he said, and drew out the rose from her waist. "The wrong yellow after all. I come to that conclusion." His voice dropped and his fingers were in her hair, untangling the other rose. Vaguener, taking no interest in such things, yet acute to everything that he saw, perceived that Buttifant was stirred. He could not see his face; the back of his head, the bend of his body was enough. When a man stoops over a woman in candlelight he may betray his secret. Vaguener thought it odd—considering Jane! But love affairs wearied and even shocked him; so he passed on to other thoughts. He had plenty. And Buttifant was a long time taking out those roses and Jane was quiet while he did it.The Square was quiet, the rain dripped down the windows. You can sit a long time in firelight, just three.Vaguener felt as if something were loosened in him; that tightness—which was the stress of living with Jane and hearing her scream and seeing her clothes—loosened. She even looked natural in her evening dress; she did not look painstaking. Perhaps there was promise in Jane?Her airs of noisy achievement were in abeyance. Of course to-morrow he must wake up—to a grim progression of boastful and industrious days. He knew how hard she worked.The pathos of Jane came to him as he sat in the dim light and saw her sitting quiet clothed gorgeously in violet.He would make Fame for himself and Fortune for them both. She should not work so hard. She should find time to improve herself; perhaps she would allow him to give her hints. Struggle made a woman hard. It was a shame. He burned with brotherly valour.Jane's point of view, Jane's astonishing vanity, never occurred to him. The idea of finding an opponent in Jane, an imaginative comrade, or even a rival, did not enter his mind.He kept looking at her, and looking at Buttifant. Nobody spoke. The eloquence of the occasion was strong upon all three. Vaguener felt family affection for his sister Jane; yet if she broke through these soothing moments—by a laugh or one of her giggles—he would murder her. For she would have destroyed something sacred. His ideas were flowing fast and taking form. To-morrow he would work. Oh how he would work! What a glorious, what a world-compelling piece of industry his should be. All great reputations were made at once; between a night and a day.Jane laughed aloud without warning."Your laugh is like crumpets," Vaguener said ridiculously. "We want a bell to warn us first."His face grew violent. Buttifant thought, "What a pocket Mephistopheles this swarthy little brother is!""Crumpets! How absurd!" Jane was looking outrageously arch. "I was thinking of something Mr. Branch said the other day. It was so sudden."Branch was her agent; a fat calm man, upon whom her future hung. Branch had his finger on the public pulse; Jane had her eyes on Branch's pendulous inscrutable face."He said how good my eyes were. I knew that, but you don't expect compliments from Mr. Branch.""He'll be cutting down your prices," Buttifant said."They are not good eyes at all." Vaguener was savage. "They are as hard as nails. When you cry your tears are splinters of glass; they jag your pocket handkerchief."He pulled out his own handkerchief and blew his nose. He made more noise than he need have done. Jane had murdered silence, so nothing else mattered.Petals of flowers and a dried leaf or two came out from his pocket with the handkerchief. One fell in Jane's lap."What's that?" she asked, picking it up.She did not sound offended; yet it was unlike Jane to be spiritless. There was a cadence in her voice—of positive sweetness and dignity, just for once. It impressed Vaguener."That's nothing," he told her, speaking very gently and looking ashamed. "Becca put them in her letter; she didn't say why. I suppose they fell out of the envelope.""Becca put flowers in her letter! But, Johnny——""I told you it was a funny letter and you know she was always an odd child," he said wearily and standing up. "I think I'll go for a stretch in the Square.""Sit still; it's pouring," said Jane."I don't mind that. I'll be back soon."He got up, stood over his sister for a moment, then stooped and kissed her."Sorry," he said. "Your Mr. Branch was right and I'm a brute. I'll be back soon."He heard Jane say to Buttifant:"Just like Johnny! You never know how to take him."Buttifant murmured something back; in that nice voice with those telling inflections he employed when speaking to Jane."I wish he'd marry her," thought Vaguener, going down the stairs, "then I should have the set to myself."It did not occur to him that—so far—all the money was Jane's. And as to love-making—which must precede marriage—he felt a sensitive distaste. Nor had Buttifant's attitude towards Jane in candle-light amused him.CHAPTER IIJOHN-ANDREW was sitting in his bedroom, a slip of a place leading off from the sitting-room and facing the Square. At the back of the set were two other rooms, looking on to Gray's Inn Road. These were the kitchen and Jane's bedroom. They were noisy but Jane could sleep through anything. This was one of her boasts. She said she had the imaginative temperament and yet her nerves were sound.He sat there; it was only ten o'clock, the month was February and the morning bitterly cold. His oil stove, warranted not to smell, yet turned him sick with its fatty fumes—and he cursed the shade of the man who—hundreds of years ago—had built this room and not put in a fireplace.Jane was talking in the kitchen to the charwoman, arranging the mid-day meal. Jane was an excellent manager and most economical. She did the marketing herself. She was excellent—and she was spiked all over like a hedgehog! Vaguener alternated, in his relations with Jane, between fits of articulate fury and fits of mute penitence. He used to go out and buy her little gifts after he had been brutal; senseless cheap things—for his money was running out. The top of her desk was littered with trifles.Jane was shouting in the kitchen,"You can use margarine for the apple turnover, Mrs. Welfare. I'll bring some in. Make a nice thick crust."Then she laughed. Then she went into her bed-room. She was putting on her hat. Vaguener waited for her to cross the Square, with her little basket, her unrolled umbrella and her oldest clothes. He watched her. What a joy it was to know she was out of the place if only for twenty minutes!Her absence made him feel free and manly. He looked out of his window and he knew that Buttifant, in the next set, had left his easel and was looking out of his. They both watched Jane: and Buttifant's eyes said more than his did.He continued to look at the Square, with its green grass and its austere houses. Beyond it, was the world: and men were doing strong things. But he must sit here, just labouring at the intangible.When Jane was in, there was the noise of her typewriter and he could not think. There was coarseness and reproach in it; she worked so fast and sold so well. He had not made a penny since he left Taplow. And he knew that his position was contemptible. This dependence upon Jane was eating into him; it was making him hate her.He said to himself throughout the days—and the saying dogged his nights—that he must live upon Jane for the time being. To live upon the earnings of a woman was devitalising; yet you had to do it. It is all very well to say that a man, lacking any other sort of income, may go out and sweep a crossing. The fact remains that he cannot and does not. This was Vaguener's line of argument: also, he knew how much would be lost to the world if he went back to teaching. He must not stifle his gift; he must give himself every chance. Fortunate—for the world—that Jane was there to help!He had been in Gray's Inn three months and every morning after breakfast he settled in this slip of a room. He watched Jane go to market, he saw her come back; he heard her take off the cover of her typewriter. She did it with a flourish. Heaven knew what she was thinking!She worked in a clattering frenzy until one o'clock, when they had dinner. Vaguener sat chilled and savage, thinking hotly, producing sparely. How could you put your ideas into form with that vulgarity going on through the wall? He found the mornings long. He was glad—as a dog might be glad—when he heard the sound of crockery in the kitchen and the feet of Mrs. Welfare going backwards and forwards laying the cloth in the sitting-room. Yet he was not hungry. Jane was and she daily provided what she called a good hot spread. She used to smile at him so lovingly directly he came into the room. She would say, "Had a good morning, old boy? I have." She had his chair ready by the table. She carved herself and heaped his plate. She was never cross or grudging or weary; she was only pleased with herself.After dinner she used to go back to her typewriter and John-Andrew went for a walk; to get ideas, so he said. It invariably meant turning into the British Museum. He spent aimless hours in the Reading Room, his head getting stuffier. At first he used to go for omnibus rides; he learnt new suburbs. Then his money went. He could live upon Jane but he certainly could not ask her for pocket money. When it came to asking for pocket money the violent thing must happen. So he merely walked to the Museum and back. Tea would be ready when he returned; tea—and candles burning. How good of her to do that! She indulged him with candles until seven. Then she turned on the gas and did some more typing. About this time, he used to go across the landing and talk to Buttifant, who would be working also—but in what might be called a well-bred way.He liked Buttifant at first; then later on he resented him. He imagined that Buttifant was privately criticising him for living upon Jane. He would not stand criticism of his private affairs from any man.If he did not go to Buttifant, then Buttifant about nine o'clock would come across the landing to them. Jane would put away her typewriter and get out cakes and make chocolate; which was the only supper they had. She used to talk loudly to Buttifant about her work and about his. Vaguener was left out in the cold. His eyes, sad and angry, would glance from one to the other as they sat in the firelight. He had to thank Buttifant for this hour of firelight. He would come in and say that his eyes ached with so much pen and ink work; Jane, who was most sweetly considerate for everybody, would at once consent to sit in semi-darkness, although she chafed at it. Jane's good heart, her spacious common sense and pathetic industry should have gained for her homage from all men. Yet Nature had put her so perversely together. She was plain and noisy. She was vain.All the days were just alike, except Sundays. Jane never worked then: she went to church in the morn-ing and lay on the sofa with a novel all the afternoon. She read every novel that was worth while, she insisted that you had to, if you wrote fiction. You learnt what was ruling the market. You modelled yourself.No typewriter on Sundays, thank God!More and more Vaguener hated the sound of the typewriter; and he knew that, even if she were dead, he would hear the sound of her bell.Yet he consoled himself by thinking that although he was living upon Jane now, it would not be for long. Although Jane was contemptuously good-natured to him now; and bore with him and fed him—it would not be for long. The time might come when she would have to borrow money of him. He glowed—and with real affection for her. Dear worthy vulgar young woman! She should never borrow, he would not wait until she asked. He would take two handfuls of chinking gold, he would pour them between her knees. Oh yes, Jane should have a good time! She should be lazy, she should have a chance of keeping quiet.Jane would never fall low, but she would never fly high: this expressed her work. Jane was not going to be rich but he was. When—in literature—you once started on money-making, in the true exclusive sense, there was practically no end to it. True, he was not making a penny now, but he was building up—and the structure should be Fortune. He conserved his power of the chance, while Jane had none. This consoled him, made him content to wait, made eating at her table less bitter.Time went on; he was bored to death, he was barren and yet buoyant. He was a contemptible creature—according to Buttifant; also, perhaps, according to Jane; for he never got behind those pale blue eyes of hers with the sharp black pupils. Her face was like the face of a china doll; hard and firm and fresh and shiny.Yet he believed in himself and he knew that he would achieve himself, he would cast those two in the shade. For the present, they might think what they liked. Jane had gone as far as she could ever go, Buttifant had cut one of his wings. He could no more fly than a cock in a wired fowl run.He went across to Buttifant's set late one evening and found him at his easel."I'm alone," he said, sitting down. "Am I in your way? Jane's gone to a party.""In my way, not a bit. So she's gone to a party? In her violet rig?""In her violet rig," Vaguener nodded, "but with a cheap coral necklace."He sat down by the lire, looking round him. Buttifant used his sitting-room simply as a studio. It was bare and untidy; in direct contrast to Jane's room across the landing. Yet he had extraordinary water-colour drawings stuck here and there on the wall. When Jane had finished work she put the cover on her typewriter, locked up her papers in the roll-top desk and was elegant. She had a few bits of family furniture brought from the Rectory in Cornwall, these—the reserved air of the panelled walls and a few inherited ornaments—made the place too good for Jane."Directly I can afford it," said Vaguener, "I'll buy her some topazes. Do you think they'd be nice with the violet?""Yes, or turquoise—to go with her eyes."Buttifant was doing water-colours. He made gluggy swishy noises when he washed his brush. Presently he came to the fire and sat down, lighting a cigarette.He held out the case to Vaguener who, taking one, felt helpless, mad and hot—as he felt upon those rare occasions when he asked Jane for a second helping at dinner. He had no tobacco of his own and no money to buy any. He had emptied his cigarette case this morning between breakfast and dinner—for he smoked ceaselessly while he sat alone, trying to work, listening to Jane's tapping, and looking out at the Square, around which on all sides the industrious world of accomplished men was flowing. For him! He was not accomplished; he had done nothing but prove himself a failure as a schoolmaster. Yet he would end by doing everything. He would show them. So he smoked without ceasing and he elegantly turned off vague sentences. His idea, for the present, was a book of essays; glittering—like the tail of a comet: yet steadfast as the eternal stars. Jane had said that poetry did not pay. So he would try prose first, since pocket money—at least—must be made. And such prose! He magnificently compared the words that he was putting together and the words that she put. Only one partition wall between two efforts so sublimely diverse! It was incredible.He had smoked his last cigarette while Mrs. Welfare was laying the cloth for dinner that morning. After dinner he had gone out and spent his last shilling on flowers for Jane to wear with her violet frock. She had been tearfully grateful and she had told him that they did not match."Jane's eyes!" he laughed—and Buttifant privately cursed his brotherly brutality. "They are glass eyes! I saw a case in High Holborn. I stopped by that case and I matched Jane's black and blue eyes—to a glassiness."He smoked in peevish haste."I'm putting you off your work." He looked behind him at the
easel. "I get in everybody's way. I'm the little boy in the
fable—but it won't be for  onglong.""I didn't mean to work." Buttifant shut his aching eyes and Vaguener studied the feminine white lids."Why do you do water-colours by gaslight? Do people? I know nothing of pictures," he asked."I was only gloating." Buttifant looked quickly at him. "That's the stuff I love—and I haven't time to give myself to it properly. I like to do it at night. With my tired eyes and my dog-tired brain and the artificial light I get queer effects. Next morning get out of bed early and come in and look at it and say to myself, 'Is it so bad as to be surpassingly good? Or is it so good that it must be ghastly?' I can't understand my water-colour stuff; it goes beyond me. It runs off somewhere and I can't follow. It is funny—but perhaps not funny enough. Some critic—a far cleverer chap, yet not with my trick of sloshing on colour—may decide on it some day."He looked at Vaguener with droll warm modesty. There was colour in his face and there was friendship in Vaguener's little black eyes. For he understood all that Buttifant was striving for—and he wished him luck. He was not jealous of any canvas Fame. Men might paint pictures: they should not write books until he had written his.He would cut down the first man who got in his way."Some day," said Buttifant, "I will have a show. I'll put these things to the test," he waved his hands round the walls. "And yet I never have time to breathe. After all, what does it matter? This idea of reputation is a cruel chimera. Yet men get caught by it.""It is the only thing there is." Vaguener lifted his voice, he moved his hands about fast. How strong they looked; those lean little brown hands!Buttifant said, "There is love. Getting your living and making love. God sent us into the world for that.""Love!" Vaguener's trick of looking frigid made Buttifant feel too frank. "I take no interest in it, nor does Jane. That is our family trait. We shall die out as a family. It is intended.""There is your cousin Becca. And there is her parson brother.""I wasn't thinking of Becca. Kenneth is like us."Vaguener was curt; he wished to change the topic."I assure you," Buttifant was insistent, "that nothing else matters but home. You can't call this," he indicated his own set, "nor that," nodding his head towards Jane's, "home. We have workshops, your sister and I.""What is home?""Any little corner where you crowd with the woman you love. May be Grosvenor Square, may be a caravan, may be one of your stone cottages in Cornwall. Doesn't matter which or what. It is the close magic space for the chosen two and it is home."Vaguener got up. He fetched from the table a pen and ink drawing which Buttifant had done that day. It was hardly dry. He looked evil. He pointed to the woman in the picture. She was short and thick, she was commonplace—yet there was something to her. And it was this 'something to it' which made Buttifant's work the popular success it was—although he always drew the same woman."Is this the chosen woman for the little space, Buttifant?"He was sardonic, he was full of meaning. They both knew that the woman was just Jane."Every man," Buttifant temporised, "every artist I mean, has a particular model and he can't get away from her. He is at the mercy of the woman who influences him.""The woman he loves?"Vaguener was persistent and contemptuous and cold."Not of necessity." Buttifant laughed bitterly. "I know artists who could tell you tales about that; they don't draw the woman they love, but the woman who caught them earliest. Artists are gullible fish; a bent hairpin is bait enough.""This one caught you earliest?""If you like. Put the thing back, Vaguener, please. It is no good my thinking about marriage. A man can only keep one woman at a time and I've got my mother.""You could marry a woman you didn't have to keep. She might keep you." Vaguener was glaring.Buttifant looked at him. "Take that drawing away, there's a good chap," he said mildly.Vaguener did as he was told. He sat down again. He asked for another cigarette."Here's a box here," Buttifant said delicately and taking one of a hundred, hardly broken into, from the mantelshelf, "which I can't smoke. Turkish. Do they upset you? Do you mind smoking them? It would be a kindness; for they tempt me.""Thank you." Vaguener looked at him steadily but the white blank face expressed nothing. "I'll be kind."He laughed.It was such a shaky laugh that Buttifant felt a tear in it."Is she also the woman who influenced you first." Vaguener pointed to the picture of a redundant blonde cut from a magazine and fastened by a drawing-pin to the wall.She was beautiful, yet—perversely—she was not unlike Jane."She is any woman you like to make her. Your sister was bothering me about her the other day. Isn't it time," Buttifant pulled out his watch, "that she was in? Where's she gone?""A literary dinner," Vaguener spoke with jealous reverence."She's only a minnow." Buttifant sounded sweet. "She goes to see the big fish swim.""You've got to have a ticket even for her pool." Vaguener had already finished his cigarette; he took another. "She went off in a great bustle and a noisy glory. Mrs. Welfare came in to hook her up. She told me that Mr. Branch said it did her good to be seen about; he wished her to do it, whenever she got the chance, for it helped her.""Branch is a humbug. Have you been to see him about your own work, Vaguener?""Yes. He was cordial, yet firm. He merely asked me to bring him what I'd done.""That's Branch," Buttifant said. "Hopeful and implacable. Did you take him anything?""My dear fellow, I haven't done anything—to a positive finish. My work isn't of that quality."The red look—of eye and cheek and neck—overspread Vaguener. Buttifant felt—as he had felt many times—that suppressed fire was here. Whose house would it burn down?"I see," he said softly. "Oh I understand you—thoroughly.""I know you do. I knew that directly you showed me your water-colours. You could make a name with water-colours.""Perhaps—but I haven't time to try. I can't stop, no, not for half a day. Two brothers at boarding-school and a mother, bless her heart, who hasn't a notion of economy and never will have. And work, which must be done at once, coming in by every post.""Suppose you didn't do it at once?""Somebody else would get the job. I should fall out, that's all." Buttifant's simple face—white and vacuous—seemed to shift."I'm not like you," he said, without a touch of ill nature, "I haven't anybody to fall back on.""Well, there is plenty of Jane to lean against." Vaguener burst into ugly merriment. "And here it is on the stairs. Can't you hear?""Did you leave a good fire in your place?" Buttifant stood up quickly. "She's got her key I suppose? She'll be cold.""Excellent fire and she's got her key. Don't worry about Jane. She'll take off some of her finery and make some chocolate and then call across to us."Vaguener was sprawling, he had his hands in his trouser pockets; Buttifant could see his fingers work."Anyone would think you had a revolver in there," he said, moving. "I'm going across the landing to see how she is."Vaguener followed him. They went from Buttifant's set to Jane's.She was in the sitting-room, making chocolate already. Cakes were on the table, her evening cloak and the lace thing she had worn on her head lay crumpled on a chair. Vaguener tidily picked them up. He looked at the lace."Spanish," he said to Buttifant, "and our mother's."He folded it.Buttifant went to the table where Jane was watching her pot on the spirit stove."Was it a nice party?""Yes, jolly. Such good speeches. I don't want any chocolate, I couldn't touch another thing. They did give us a spread. I'm making this for you and Johnny." She poured it out. "Here you are!"She gave him a cup."I'm not sure—thank you—" Buttifant took his cup and stared at her, "that your neck needs a necklace. I think a pendant.""I like the coral," Jane was loud. "I've got a pendant somewhere; a thing with blue stones. But the setting is so funny. You remember, Johnny; it was mother's.""Yes, I remember." He took his cup from her and they settled down by the fire."Everybody admired my frock. I could see that." Jane was glowing. "It's only the second time I've worn it. You couldn't have chosen better, Johnny. It's just my particular shade of violet. I heard somebody say something behind my back about it as we were going in to dinner. I just caught the words Vaguener and violet; that was all. Wasn't it maddening? I hate to miss a compliment. But you see they know me; I was evidently being pointed out.""I should like to go to one of these shows," Vaguener was staring at her oddly, "and see you in your glory, Jane.""Would you? I should have thought they would have bored an outsider. I wish I'd known. Every member of the club may take a friend and the ticket is only half a guinea. I'd have paid that for you gladly.""Thank you," said John-Andrew—sounding sleek.Buttifant studied him; as he did, when he saw him with Jane. He pondered upon him. They were a diverse two. He supposed this was the outcome of marriage between an English parson and a Swiss inn-keeper. Jane was—Swiss! Dear fat Jane! So good and so clumsy! Jane, with her underlying quality of pathos. There was shadow to her and amazing sweetness of which she was wholly unaware. He could see through all her fripperies, both of body and brain.He knew Jane or supposed that he did. Yet no man ever quite solves this puzzle—of the feminine—which God has set out on the slate. Neither he nor Vaguener had solved Jane."But the funniest thing was," Jane was telling them, "my meeting Gabriel Best. Do you remember Best, John-Andrew?""Best, Best?""Farming people at St. Ives; up at Hellesveor. That square house, with the trees round it. And Gabriel, the second son, was always a funny boy; half asleep and sulky. I can see him driving cows through the town place now! The town place, Mr. Buttifant," she burst into laughter, "was nothing but a dirty old farm-yard. We are so funny down there, calling things by grand names. I should like you to see Cornwall. I wish I could take you.""I wish you could.""But people would talk." Jane was serious."They wouldn't if we were married.""That's too big a price to pay for a trip. You must marry Becca, my little cousin. Then I'll come and stay.""Why is she Becca?" asked Buttifant, almost impatiently—for already he was perversely sick of this girl."Her mother is Rebecca; so she is two letters—two decades—short.""How about young Best?" Vaguener was impatient. "Go on, Jane.""John-Andrew!" she sounded bitter and anxious. "That lout has written a book and it has sold. I forget how many thousands. Somebody did say. I don't seem to have heard of it, but I've been working so hard since Christmas, I haven't looked at the reviews nor been to Mudie's. It is about Cornwall, just putting in all he knows, that's all. It won't last.""What won't last?" Vaguener had gone chalk white. And in his arrogance he wondered at the note in Jane's voice. For what could any one's reputation matter to her?How ugly he looked. Buttifant saw."His vogue, stupid," Jane was short. "Just a book of sketches that happens to have caught 
on——""Oh fiction!" The colour came back to Vaguener in a rush."Yes—love things. A little religion, a little love, a lot of dialect and——""Love!" Vaguener dropped back in his chair and laughed. "That!""You can't throw cold water on love let me tell you." Jane was business-like. "I must get the book. I'll catch his trick if I can.""Did you speak to him?""Of course, that's what I'm coming to. He was so clean and so good-looking; carried himself so well. A new evening suit, if you please. That's a long way from driving cows through the town place? I was kind to him, and—he was quite simple. He didn't give himself any airs. I asked him how everybody was down at St. Ives and he told me what I didn't know. I do think Aunt Rebecca might have written. She is in London with Becca, Johnny. They are staying at a private hotel in Berner's Street. Gabriel had tea with them on Thursday. Doesn't it seem funny to think of that! But he appeared to take it for granted. He has learnt good manners all at once. I don't suppose he drinks out of his saucer, or wipes his mouth with the back of his hand, or things like that. I shall write to Aunt Rebecca.""He can marry Becca. She's the sort of girl who must marry somebody. We've always known that," Vaguener said, with queer rigidity."I wanted her for Mr. Buttifant."Jane grinned across the hearth."Gabriel Best can have her," Buttifant said."She may have made up her mind to take somebody else." Jane seemed thoughtful. "Becca's a whirlwind. She isn't like any of us. I'm so sensible and John-Andrew's so gentle—aren't you, Johnny?"She put out her fat hand and squeezed his. This was one of her little tricks. He appreciated it and it annoyed him horribly."He's awfully good," she spoke to Buttifant. "He brought me in these flowers to wear. And he's always ready to do any little marketing that I forget, aren't you, Johnny? He'll bring home anything I ask him, won't you? It was parsley for the melted butter yesterday, wasn't it?""Brought a sprig of it home in my mouth," Vaguener spoke bitterly to Buttifant."Your mouth! You didn't, Johnny!""Yes, I did," Vaguener nodded waggishly at Buttifant. "She patted my head, I wagged my tail. You missed the wagging of my tail, Jane; and you forgot to give me the bone from your chop at dinner to-day.""I think you're absurd." She looked at him with blank affection, then she sighed ever so softly—only Buttifant heard."But you help pay for your keep," she added heartily. "That's something.""And have you taken out my licence?" Vaguener asked in that deeply foreboding note of his."Don't be silly, Johnny."Jane leaned back in her chair, smoothing her violet frock with her hands. When she wore it she was like a vain bird. She looked at the two men critically; at their neat small limbs, at their two very different faces; Vaguener's was volcanic and Buttifant's was unwritten on. It was blank but responsive."I wish you two men were bigger," she said discontentedly."Which of us?" Buttifant asked her."It doesn't matter. I like a big man to look at, that's all. Gabriel Best is big. He looked awfully handsome to-night, Johnny.""You'd better marry him, then. Don't waste him on Becca.""He's too young for me. He is only twenty and I'm close on thirty. Just fancy! He has made his name—at twenty!""You can't make it properly at that age," Buttifant consoled her. "He's boggled the stitches. He'll be bursting into indecorous gaps quite soon. You see.""I don't know about that." Jane poked her fire and the glad radiance evoked by her frock forsook her. "Sometimes I'm afraid. What will happen if?——""Nothing is ever going to happen," Buttifant's rich voice flowed along the channel of consolation, except that Branch will get you more commissions and at higher prices. Or you may throw writing overboard and get married."He leaned forward, looking at her: in the plenitude of her sumptuous raiment and her fine strong limbs, in the pathos of her plain face and common craft. He ached to redeem her."I should never marry."She told him this: sounding austere, making him feel improper. Metaphorically, she boxed his ears—and he burned all over. She was more celibate than her brother. They were a cold pair. No fire in Jane; nothing but a swift attack of worldly anxiety. In John-Andrew the makings of a mighty blaze; yet not for love."The thing is," Buttifant's face became more expressionless than usual, "that we are all three at an awkward age. You are twenty-seven; don't jump forward and make it thirty. I am twenty-eight and Vaguener is thirty. We are too old for optimism and too young for philosophy.""No philosophy would console me for failing," Vaguener said, quickly passionate, "no, not if I were ninety.""Nor me," Jane shouted, "for having to go shabby. I do like to go and buy new clothes. I pride myself on my appearance. John-Andrew!" She turned to her brother and looked suddenly happy; she looked flippant and shallow and commonplace—and Jane! "I shall give a tea-party at 'my club. I shall ask Aunt Rebecca and Becca. I'll get a lot of good people together. It won't cost much and it will make a good impression on young Best.""You'd ask him?""I'm going to cultivate him. Rising young men are most useful, aren't they, Mr. Buttifant?""Most," he confirmed her. "Ask me to the party too, won't you?""Of course I shall. That goes without saying. You are asked.""Because," continued Buttifant, " he'll be an editor some day and it may be an illustrated paper. When he's worked out this Cornish vein he'll go into journalism; they do."Vaguener was listening; he felt a reverence and a jealousy at the glib way Buttifant had—and Jane—of settling things.They walked at their ease in a world—the world that he wanted. So far, he was squinting through the railings. There was a gate-keeper—and his name was Mr. Branch.Jane began to talk of the people she would ask to her party. She ticked them off on her fingers, which—when she wore evening dress—she loaded with showy, inconsequent rings; things that she had picked out of trays in the second-hand shops; some good, some bad.She mentioned names that made Vaguener tingle—for he had only seen them written on the backs of exclusive books. She proposed to bring together—to drink her tea—men and women that he reverenced. He could not imagine any of them drinking tea at all—and certainly not Jane's. He summed them—just by the line of a sonnet, or the phrase of an essay or, even, by beautifully cut cameo bits—of nature or feeling—taken from their novels. He consented to read novels; if they were of the best. He had never read a line that Jane wrote and he hoped he never might. These exalted people, to him, were the things that they wrote; their heads were in Heaven. As to mouths that would drink or kiss! Irreverent!He listened to the names. He was privately derisive: for he thought this was only Jane's usual nauseating brag. Buttifant knew better. He knew that Jane would get these people—who, after all, did not matter so much to their own world (which was his world and Jane's) as they did to Vaguener's. Nobody troubled to resist Jane; nobody wished to. She was so pushing and good-hearted; so obtuse and sunny. She was nothing and nobody; yet she was an influence at her club: by sheer sweet temper and solid shoving."They will all come," Buttifant said to her brother.Vaguener believed him. His opinion of Jane modified. He had his moments of modification over Jane. At times, her wage-earning mind was not wholly intrusive; it seemed overlaid with something else—so much so that he could almost love this fine veneer of Jane's: but if it came to scraping down to native wood again!Through all his horror of Jane and dislike of Jane, there ran sympathy. Yet he knew that any emotional episode with her would be disastrous. It would be scraping off veneer: and so ruining her as a piece of furniture with which he might live!"Would your mother like to come? It would be a nice change for her. I should think Dulwich was awfully dull," said Jane to Buttifant."She'd love to come; thank you. But it would take many Dulwiches to make my mother dull.""Would it?" Jane surveyed him casually. "I thought her a cheerful person when you brought her here to tea. I'll send her a card.""Do. She'll be delighted; it will give her a chance of wearing a new model gown she bought at the January sales.""Did you pay much for it?" Jane was blunt. "They do cost a lot of money these dear relations, don't they?" She squeezed Vaguener's hand again. " I'll have to buy you a new bowler soon, Johnny. Or would you rather have a Homburg?""I paid quite enough," Buttifant was quick; he saw Vaguener's mad face; it touched and alarmed him, " but it suits her.""I don't agree about model gowns." Jane was dogmatic and she was on her topic: for the one thing she thought she did understand was dress! "They make you look different from other people. I choose a style from a sales catalogue and then have it made to measure and trimmed according to my own ideas. That's the best way. I told your mother so when she was here. I offered to go shopping with her if she liked; for when people live in the suburbs they can't know what the latest novelty is. I'm always willing to go shopping with people and give them the advantage of my taste."She was outrageous and yet she was sincere. You couldn't feel angry. Buttifant's smile was fond."And I should hate," she went on, getting warmer, " to pay a lot for a model gown. You've got to make it last and you get so sick of it.""Not so sick as you do of yourself in navy suiting," answered Buttifant; still smiling—and thinking what a delightful bundle of complete delusion she was."Did your mother say that?""Yes.""Sometimes she says things that sound spiteful; I don't suppose she means it. And it is ridiculous, Mr. Buttifant, to turn up your nose at navy serge. Why you can pay as much as eight guineas for a suit."Her voice rose; and she nodded at him with vigorous good temper. "I don't believe in models and certainly not for your mother. No short fat woman should wear anything peculiar; she can't be too unobtrusive. You don't mind my being frank?""I'm used to it.""If you are willowy," Jane stroked her violet body, "you can carry anything off. That was one of the things Branch said to-night. He looked at me and said that. And he smiled in his old way. I always think that Branch looks a mystic, he is like that old Madame What-was-her-name?""Blavatsky?""Yes, that's it, Blavatsky.""So Mr. Branch was there." Vaguener, who had stared into the fire, roused himself. "Did he mention my work?"Jane laughed."Your work. Why you haven't done any. I should have thought"—that thread of wistfulness which only Buttifant could hear crept into her voice—"that you might have knocked something off between November and now. Branch doesn't think you'll ever be saleable.""I don't want to be—according to Mr. Branch.""And he doesn't think," Jane proceeded arrogantly, "that you've got the cut of a genius. Branch can spot them at once; he's handled so many. He found young Best.""That plough boy a genius!" Vaguener was savage. "Why, I've clouted his head for not opening a gate down at St. Ives.""There was Burns," Buttifant reminded him."I knew you'd say that." Vaguener twisted his sloping shoulders. He looked at Buttifant more tolerantly than he looked at Jane."I had to say it. Don't worry about this young Best. I've read his book. It is very good—and it is the merest flash in the pan, Buttifant assured him.""That is what Branch said." Jane's hard eyes looked knowing; they attained to something very near expression—and it was relief. "He doubts if, even with Gabriel's next book, he'll be able to get him such a lump sum down. And then we went on talking of you, Johnny. We think you ought to go back to teaching. I should try for something after Easter if I were you.""Would you?" asked John-Andrew.He looked at her. The three of them were always exchanging glances. A queer, dumb eloquence was spreading in Jane's set of chambers."Of course I should. I don't mind keeping you a bit, old boy. It doesn't count in the housekeeping, and you're most awfully good. You never speak or even move if you see I'm thinking. It might be a dog or a cat in the room. But it isn't manly to be kicking your heels about, is it?""And sucking my big toe; no it isn't.""You will turn everything into ridicule; there are times when one doesn't want to joke. You really, Johnny, haven't a chance at writing. I do wish I could make you see it. But he won't even let me read his things," she addressed herself appealingly to Buttifant. "I can imagine them though.""Oh you can imagine," Vaguener said."Of course. Isn't imagination my job? It's like Addison, I'll bet," she laughed good-temperedly in his dark face. "Those old slow coaches of the eighteenth century are quite out of the running. We mustn't write as they did. Addison wouldn't get a job as a proof reader nowadays. A man never knows what he's suited for any more than a woman knows what suits her.""But there are exceptions, surely?" Buttifant's neat mouth moved."Oh of course, exceptions." Jane involuntarily ran her hand from her shoulder to her waist."I propose," Vaguener was deliberate, "to give myself three months more. Will that suit you and Mr. Branch?""Don't look so offended, Johnny. That's the worst of you; always so abominably sensitive. I was once, but knocking about rubs it off, doesn't it, Mr. Buttifant.""It does. I also was very gloomy once," he said.Vaguener looked at him in amazement; he saw the tenderness of his face and the compassion. He wondered how Buttifant could endure Jane. The stupendous anomaly was that he had evidently fallen in love with her. Vaguener wanted to strangle Jane—and he began to wonder if, in the end, he would. He went so far—feeling mad, as he did to-night—to lift up his brown hand. He looked at it. Then he looked at her neck; so fat, so white, so short and with the coral necklace on it; that necklace which made such a clashing with bright violet. Just like her infernal stupidity!"Three months and then——" he began."Yes—then?" Jane leaned forward."You'll see when it comes to then, my dear."He started up. Buttifant stood too. Jane yawned."It's awfully late." She arose, she looked at the clock. "And I've got to do five thousand words 
to-morrow morning. Think of that, Johnny."She laughed and thumped his back.He flinched. He cowered, so it seemed to Buttifant.He turned on his heel and went into his bedroom without one more word. Those narrow shoulders of his looked crushed and dangerous.Instinctively, hardly knowing why, Jane and Buttifant, standing up close together, holding hands in the act of saying good night, held their breath and listened. There wasn't a sound in Vaguener's room: it was the silence of praying."I expect he's leaning out of the window," Jane whispered. "He does that sometimes."CHAPTER IIIJOHN-ANDREW dressed himself with almost tearful solemnity for Jane's tea. It was only a party at Jane's club—yet it was Literature to him: incongruous as that golden word was in connection with Jane!He put on a frock-coat, for he thought it was the right thing. He remained provincial. Jane went on first. She wanted to be early so that she might fuss over the arrangements. Buttifant was to go late; he always made the most of daylight.Vaguener walked down Piccadilly alone, feeling airy, looking hopeful; he felt sure that the end of his anguish was in sight. When he came into contact with really literary men—or even women—they would hail him by instinct. Distinguished minds held no communion with people like Mr. Branch and like Jane.Mr. Branch was going to the tea; but he did not propose to speak to the brute. He had once detected covert amusement upon the shining plain of the agent's big face.The only use he had to-day for Mr. Branch—and Jane—was that they might introduce him to people. This done, he, by his personality, would do the rest.It was a delicious day; early February, with the first daffodils in the roomy baskets of the strapping flower girls. Such a pretty blue sky chased across the London parks that he thought of Cornwall. He looked at sooty sheep under the bare trees. Down there in Cornwall, at St. Ives—at home—sheep upon the hills, that were sharp green in spring-time and blood crimson when autumn came, down there, then, sheep upon the hills looked like the boulders of scattered stone.He had begun to long for the quietness of the country, for the consoling solitude: when he had made his name he would go back to Cornwall and stay there. He would work, contemplate and rejoice. Once he had thought that he never wished to see it again. That was because he had been restless, wretched and ambitious there. His cousin Kenneth had priggishly bossed him, his aunt Rebecca had asked questions. When his name was made, when it was such a big name that even fishermen upon the wharf knew it—and regarded it as something mysteriously rich; then he would go back to St. Ives; he would feast upon the homage of his neighbours. Carelessly—for he detested philanthropy—he would throw money to the poor.Jane's club was at one of the big houses in Piccadilly. When he got in at the door he found himself closed around by stereotyped magnificence. The garish modern touch got on his nerves. It depressed him and his glad dreams died. He was announced, he moved forward and his limbs felt heavy.Jane was at the door of the reception room receiving people. She gave him a sisterly grin and a critical sisterly glance. He felt that something about him wasn't right and said to her when he was close enough:"Is my tie straight? Why do you stare?""It isn't your tie," Jane whispered back and she let out a rather uncomfortable giggle. "Get on: you are blocking the way. I'm on the look out for young Best; he promised faithfully to come. Gó and talk to Becca, she is over there with Auntie. I haven't had time to speak to them."Vaguener moved on. He had only gone a few steps when a girl detached herself from the throng and enveloped him. That, so he thought, was the way of putting it; his cousin Becca enveloped him. She drew him to the end of the big room where her mother stood, looking sulky and sharp, in her solid good clothes, with her astringent country face."I've been waiting for you, Johnny," Becca said. "I don't care about Jane's party but I did want to see you."She was nineteen and looked younger. Her flaming cheeks and intent eyes told her secret. She was in love with John-Andrew; seriously, deeply and for ever. That was Becca's way with her heart. It was exclusive and strong. She would be expressive and changeless."Did you?" he said listlessly. "That was kind."He hardly felt the close pressure of Becca's hand, he was totally dead to its significance. He was looking at the people and he wondered which was who. The room was full of somebodies and nobodies. In this well-dressed, gabbling crowd were the people who would deliver him from Jane, who would set him on his feet, who—in a word—would recognise him at once and mark his import.His Aunt Rebecca took his hand, she hesitated a moment, then she warmly kissed him. She was a wholesome, simple woman, with a homely tongue.She had been looking at all these people who mattered nothing to her: nor did she conceive that they meant anything much to the rest of the world. She was angry with Jane for neglecting her; it was not good manners."How are you getting on, John-Andrew?" she asked him maternally. "Jane says you haven't got another school yet?"Vaguener saw that Mr. Branch was talking obsequiously to a short man with a furious moustache. He wondered who the man was. He meant something or Branch would not stand there wasting time and smiling so steadfastly."I've given up teaching," he told his relative stonily. "I have taken up literature.""My dear boy, but it doesn't pay nearly so well, does it? And Jane works so hard that——""Oh, mother, he doesn't want to talk about getting his living? People don't come to tea-parties for that.""Jane says they do, my dear. All on the make; that was her expression about her guests."Aunt Rebecca found herself in a society of which she knew nothing and consequently of which she did not approve. She had been standing neglected in a corner and she came to the conclusion that although the room was handsome and the dresses expensive, the company was not well bred. People in the neighbourhood of St. Ives—which stood for her sole world—were dull and they were different.She preferred them; for she distrusted odd ways of dressing yourself and an informal mode of greeting.She said something of this to her nephew."People in Cornwall, John-Andrew, dress well as you know; everything good—the fashions are excellent at Penzance—but they are not extreme. I don't like that woman's neck wear."She indicated a dress cut low at the throat."There isn't any wear, mother," Becca laughed. "That's it. Go and get us some tea, Johnny?"He went off. His spirits drooped. Mr. Branch—from whom he would have condescended to take introductions—had not seen him; Jane was at the door with a group of people. She was laughing and showing her teeth; her hat was crooked and between her smiles she looked cross. Something had upset her.As he steered his way back across the noisy room with the cups of tea, he was struck and cheered by the beautiful flame of Becca's hair. It appeared as if never before had he seen her hair. Red, deep, dull—and such lots! He knew nothing of it, he would never know—but his grandfather had wooed a woman with a head like Becca's! She was living at Towednack now and she was close on ninety.Everything was fantastically happening over again. He and his grandfather were to be identical: cold, ambitious, guilty; foredoomed to fail. He regarded his cousin's hair with gratitude; it was beautiful and all loveliness cheered him. God knew he needed comfort. As to falling in love with it, as to feeling any tingle of a young man's passion, he was a stranger to this. He would always be. The celibate drop had come down to them. It was his heritage and Jane's.This, the family living and the family mystery were What their grandfather had bequeathed.He said, as he handed her cup:"Your head is the loveliest lire that angels ever lighted."She stood dumb, radiant, confused."Don't be profane, John-Andrew." His aunt was blunt. "Don't pick up the tricks of all these people. Standing here, knowing not a soul, I've heard some extraordinary things said."Becca never spoke; she was quivering."But it is pretty hair." Vaguener awkwardly touched the great knot that stood out under the brim of his cousin's hat."That's according to fancy." His aunt looked at her girl. "Red hair, so I tell Becca, is like olives and caviare and other odd things to eat. You are greedy over them or they make you sick.""You must find a greedy man, Becca," John-Andrew said with gentle constraint, with a chill in his voice."I could make him greedy," the girl said swiftly and as swiftly she looked up. There was challenge in her glance and infinite pleading.Her eyes were small and dark, as his were. They swum in candid eloquence. If ever a woman wooed a man she did."Eating isn't in my way," he said; sounding detached, looking at her with amused softness; speaking to her as if she were a child and drawing subtly back."You two are ridiculous," his aunt laughed—and her laugh was shrill—with her manner and her quick glance and her curiously satirical mouth. "The idea of eating hair!""Makes your throat tickle, doesn't it, mother?" Becca absurdly kissed her. She seemed to overbrim with feeling."Let's go away," she said, "Jane's party is a silly affair.""My dear, I said so ten minutes after we came into the place but you would stay.""Yes I would stay." Becca stared down at her cousin—she was tall and he was short. "I wanted to see you, John-Andrew.""I was glad to see you, for I don't know anybody here," he answered simply.Yet he turned from her. With a despondent glare he surveyed the company. He pondered upon it. He asked himself—was the vital person here? He sought for recognition in all the faces. He had buoyed himself by meditating upon this tea-party of Jane's. He had made himself believe that there would be people there—or at least a person—who would lift him out of the mire; the mire of his life with Jane.And there was nobody. They were all greeting each other and cackling and laughing. They streamed on; in the noisiest of brooks. Not one of them even looked his way. They made their own world and it was full. Jane was surrounded, Mr. Branch had disappeared. Vaguener stood ignored, broken, his heart dying. He had his aunt and his cousin Becca. That was all. Just these two—with their airs of orchards and blue seas; and shallow great pans of cream. His relatives expressed the Cornish things."Jane's got her back up about something," his aunt was saying, in her observant homely way. "Can't you see how she jumps if a new person comes into the room? She's looking for somebody.""Buttifant perhaps," John-Andrew said listlessly. "He is coming on later with his mother.""That man on the other side of the landing? The man who came into Jane's apartments when we had tea with you last Sunday? ""Yes, that's Buttifant. He's a black and white artist; also he is a Dean's son.""A Dean's son! My dear Johnny! I didn't know they did."His aunt was impressed."Did what?""Pictures in books. Dean's sons!""Why not? The Dean is dead and he didn't leave his wife and children a penny. Buttifant discovered he had a profitable trick of scratching.""Deans are so respectable."His aunt's voice softened upon a note of reverence."You will think better of Jane's work now," her nephew said; and, just speaking of Jane's work—carelessly—his face showed violence."I don't know about that," she was resolute. "We don't meet them about, these scribbling people, do we, Becca? There are writers and painters at St. Ives, but they only know each other."Becca did not answer. She was standing by John-Andrew. A look of wonder was on her face;she seemed out of the world."Go and fetch me a cake," her mother said vigorously. "No, don't move, Johnny. Let her. I want to talk to you about your prospects."When she was alone with him she added:"Becca's in love with you. Don't encourage her, for you haven't a penny. Don't make a fool of the child. I'll find her a good husband, if that is what she wants.""In love! With me!"His thin mouth twisted."You needn't look as if you had swallowed a spoonful of mustard. Becca's a dear girl, and pretty too—if you like that colour.""Colour! It isn't that. We don't marry in our family.""I did," his aunt looked at him, "though I've no patience with this improper nonsense of falling in love. I felt cross with Becca for looking at you as she did just now. I was ashamed. I felt as you feel—shy."They looked at each other. Perfect understanding stood in their eyes. The family chilliness fanned them."Shy—that's it," John-Andrew admitted gravely."Marriage," his aunt spoke quickly, for she saw her daughter edging a way back to them with a large plate of pastries, "is a matter of suitability. In my case I married a man thirty years my senior. He wanted a housekeeper, I wanted a home. I chose to rule an old man in preference to being bullied by one. Your grandfather was a handful, John-Andrew.""So we've been told," he said."Oh I don't mean the murder," she lowered her voice. "He was hard to live with, so I got married. It was a good way out, don't you think? Mr. Marshall adored me—but I had to put up with something you see.""A very good way. I can imagine that marriage would be that; a way out," her nephew said.Becca was at his elbow, holding the cakes near his nose."Gabriel's here," she said to her mother, "I spoke to him, I told him to come to us in this corner. But Jane's got hold of him, she's introducing him to people. They all buzz round him like bees. And she looks in a much better temper, so I suppose she was waiting for him and not for Mr. Buttifant.""She wouldn't bother about Buttifant," Vaguener said."Of course not, she's sure of him. That young man is in love with Jane, although why I can't think. For a plainer girl than Jane you don't often meet," remarked his aunt."Do you always know when people are in love, mother? ""Always, my dear. What's the good of being a mother else? Here comes young Best. I suppose people take him for a gentleman, but I can see him carrying buckets of pig swill across the fields between Hellesvean and Hellesveor. I always shall."Mrs. Marshall laughed good-temperedly. She meant no ill-will; but the mere idea of Jane being desirable or Gabriel Best being anything but a farm boy amused her intensely. To her philosophy, God when He made His little manikins put them each one on a ledge: they could not get off it. Sometimes they pretended to, sometimes people thought they did."There's Buttifant coming in now with his mother?" John-Andrew glanced towards the door."What a nice-looking woman!" His aunt brightened. "Can't you bring them over, Johnny?""Yes, I'll go and get them."He went away. He seemed so glad to go that Becca felt he skipped. Her little dark eyes romantically followed him. Her mother regarded her uncomfortably."We've lost Johnny now," the girl said at the end of live minutes, through which she and her mother kept silence. "Is he going to be a big person too, like all the rest?""Big persons! My dear, they are nothing outside this room. You may take it from me, Becca, that your cousin John-Andrew will never be so much as poor Jane. And as to Gabriel Best——""Gabriel!" Becca said. "Half London is talking about him. Just think of all the papers we've seen his portrait in!""Oh he's a good-looking boy," her mother returned."When I went to fetch the cakes they were tumbling over each other to talk to him.""We've talked to him often enough, Becca, and kept our feet. This place seems to me mad. I wish John-Andrew would come back.""He doesn't seem as if he meant to come back, mother. He is talking to Jane, he is asking her something and she is shaking her head. You see that man with the big face? The one talking to Johnny now. He is Jane's agent and Gabriel's too. He made Gabriel.""Wicked stuff and nonsense, Becca. What things they do say.""You can ask Gabriel himself, mother, for here he comes."Gabriel joined them; flushed with triumph, giving himself equal airs, if not superior. Becca's mother failed to understand: he was a farming boy down there at St. Ives; she was the daughter of the late Rector and the mother of the present one. Yet he surveyed her—here and now in this strange room—with a quizzical glance. She would be glad to get home again and weigh up human values.She said to him—as she had said to John-Andrew,"How are you getting on, Gabriel?"He returned with a great happy laugh, throwing his handsome head back,"I have got on, Mrs. Marshall. I am at the top of the tree.""Take care the first gale doesn't blow you down then. We have rough storms in Cornwall.""It would take a bigger gale than the Atlantic blows to dislodge me," he was lofty and glad and good-humoured. "I'm made—for life; Branch says so and he did it.""Didn't I tell you so, mother?"Becca was looking at John-Andrew as he moved amongst people at the other end of the crowded room; convoyed from one to the other by Branch. She marked his manner as he talked to these strangers; she saw his face, eager and strained and defiant. She was perplexed and pained. He did not look in his element; lie looked almost humble,he seemed to cringe. Through her young strong passion—the feeling that was so new and so overwhelming that it sent her to sleep on the other sides of herself—there stirred the maternal anxiety of a woman who loves: she would die before she would let John-Andrew be hurt! She hated those men and those women who chose to ignore him; or who appeared to be amused by him. He did not merge with the company. She was watching him; and she noticed that Jane watched too. Jane was talking to Buttifant; the little man with the white quiet face. Buttifant's mother, fat and beautifully attired, was standing near. Becca turned to Gabriel."I told mother that Mr. Branch made you. Could he do the same for John-Andrew?""Don't know," Gabriel's voice was careless. "I didn't know your cousin wrote. Branch has got to have something to go on; a little dust.""Or you could spare a rib?""Now this is irreligious, Becca," her mother said. "Kenneth would be shocked to hear you.""Dear old Kenneth! He is so devout and so literal. We don't mean any harm, do we, Gabriel? Would you give a rib for John-Andrew's making? Come now!"She laughed in his face; not looking up, not looking down. They were of equal height and a handsome pair.Her mother watched them. Gabriel Best was in love with her girl! And her girl was in love with John-Andrew! A pretty state of things. The family chill of amazed disdain ran through this elder woman; she felt a distaste for her own daughter. The look upon Becca's face when she spoke to John-Andrew, the look upon Gabriel's when he spoke to Becca! People should get married without making a fuss; they should not have feelings, before or after. She must talk to Kenneth. He would be of a kin rigour. He had sworn himself to celibacy because he conceived this to be the duty of a priest. His mother had said, looking at him with affectionate approval, "You would be a celibate in Salt Lake City, Kenneth."He hadn't denied this."Would I give a rib! I expect I'd give my whole skeleton if you asked for it," Gabriel was saying to Becca. "Yes: you should play with my bones."The girl flushed. She read the look in his eyes; solid-looking eyes, brown and flashing; big and with splendid lashes. He was a pastoral type of boy. When Mrs. Marshall said she imagined him with a bucket of swill going across the fields, this expressed him. His russet skin and thick frank features, his brown throat and red young mouth spoke solely of farming. He had a mat of hair. It was a ruddy thatch—and the woman who loved him would want to dig her fingers into it and laugh. He was a boy who should make love upon a hill in bare reality; not write about love in the thickness of a city."We read a story of yours in one of the magazines before we came out, Gabriel," Becca said. "What a lot of things you are writing!""Stories that we already know," her mother was brisk. "About old people and old ways. Stories out of the Digey; I could tell them myself, for I know them all. There is nothing in it, yet you seem to have turned people's heads.""Yes, I've turned the head; the head of this great serious London."Gabriel's voice lifted. People stopped talking, looked at him, prepared to listen to him. The word had gone round that he was most romantic; he was a ploughboy."So you like London, do you? It's about time now, "Becca's mother looked at the clock on the wall, "for milking cows. Wouldn't you rather be doing that? Are you ever going to do it again?""I shall never do it again," patronising incredulity ran in his voice. "But I don't forget the way of doing it—and that's the thing! Mud in the town place, the moon coming up over Rosewall; the sounds and the smells and the look of the beasts' hides in the fading light, and the groaning of mother's cider press, as I put my leg over the stone stile."He paused."The pad of their feet in the soft mud and the funny slow swishing of their tails and the sound of the milk when it splashes," he added almost reverently."Well, I'm glad you like London. We shall be glad to get back to St. Ives, shan't we, Becca?""You're not going yet?" he asked anxiously."At the end of the week we are. And we're going from Jane's party now. Come along, Becca, we'll find Jane and say good-bye. It is the most unsocial and uncomfortable affair I ever was at. I feel as if I'd been standing in a corner on one leg all the afternoon. Not a soul has spoken to us but you and Johnny.""You soon get used to London society," Gabriel told her. "I'm quite in the swim. I've been out to dinner every night this week and to lunch three days in the week and this is my second At Home since last Wednesday. I hardly get time to do my work and editors keep asking for it. And I'm getting known all over London by my walk. People turn round when I pass.""They are looking for a yoke on your shoulders. Better come back to Cornwall, Gabriel, and put what money you've made into the farm and marry a nice girl."He looked at his Rector's mother blandly. He was not offended, he was sorry for her and gentle with her. She was simply a Rector's mother, while he was the great Gabriel Best. How could he expect her to understand? This ran through his head quite simply.He guilelessly believed himself to be the best known person in London. If he had been told that there was a single cab driver out there in Piccadilly who did not know the name of Gabriel Best, who had not been moved by Gabriel Best's Cornish sketches, he would not have believed. He would have remained gentle, boastful, bland and unperturbed—for the thing was impossible! He was always charming and gentle; for he had no need to give himself airs, and he knew that humility was the proper attribute of genius. People said how thoroughly unspoiled he was."Here comes Jane," Becca said. "And she's bringing Mr. Buttifant. You liked him, mother.""I did, my dear. Nothing in him; but a modest young man.""He's quite a good sort," Gabriel smiled. "A hack you know, but a good sort. There are differences in art. There are classes. Buttifant is the middle class—he's safe. I'm the aristocratic class—I'm sensitive. Your niece, Miss Vaguener, is lower class. She goes out with her market basket on Saturday night; she has the weekly wages mind and she knows it. I've told her so."He laughed joyously. With the exquisite arrogance of successful twenty, he carelessly comprised the world."She turns off more work than anybody else and it is the most shoddy. In our world," his smile was dazzling, "classes, as you know them, don't count, Mrs. Marshall. I, a farmer's boy, rank with the dukes. Does that amaze you?""Do you? Yes it does," said Mrs. Marshall.Becca laughed in his face. She said nothing. He laughed back; lover-like and delightful."You won't marry a duke?" he asked, dropping his voice, his eyes, behind the banter, flaming with a fire which she very well knew.She trembled. He felt for her then as she felt for John-Andrew! What a marvellous world it was! A thrilling world! They stood there staring at each other and quietly trembling."I won't presume to marry above me," she said.Then Jane came up behind and thumped her in a hearty cousinly way between the shoulders. Yoú could do as you chose with relations and say what you chose: this was one of Jane's theories. And to thump people was a trick of hers."Johnny worried me to introduce him to people," she said. "I wish he wouldn't. What's the good? You can't make a reputation or a living just by hobnobbing with celebrities.""If you could, what a boon I should be," handsome Gabriel was serious. "I talk to everybody who is brought up to me and introduced. It was awfully good of you to ask me this afternoon and to bring together such interesting people to meet me."Jane looked at him narrowly, with those china-blue, doll's eyes of hers which betrayed nothing. Her aunt Rebecca's eyes bolted; for she had a religious sense of station: she could not accustom herself to Gabriel's black coat, so beautifully cut; to say nothing of his superb brag. She had a vague and general idea that before long he would be put in his place."Johnny," Jane seemed worried, "has such queer ways. He isn't used to society; he is too genial and too nervous and too sulky. People stare. And then he will say 'Mr. Branch' over and over again. I wish he wouldn't."Her nervous laugh was racked and eloquent. Jane did not seem herself. Buttifant, coming up with his mother, went to her quietly when the introductions were over and the two elder women were talking. He asked,"What's the matter?""How did you know anything was? It's Johnny with his absurd idea of writing. I wish he wouldn't. It only makes him absurd. People laugh at him.""No, they don't. They think him an interesting chap. He's different.""That's just it. He hasn't done anything, Mr.Buttifant. He hasn't any right to be different. Now with Gabriel," she dropped her voice—yet hardly enough so Buttifant feared—"there is some reason. He talks like a young ass but——""He has bought the right to bray?""Yes, that's it. Johnny mustn't bray, he mustn't have long ears. He insisted upon being introduced to nearly everyone. I wish he wouldn't. He came up to me looking quite violent. He doubled up his fists. He insisted. Oh here he comes! I am glad. I can keep my eye on him."John-Andrew joined them. What they noticed most was his concentrated look at Gabriel and the swift way in which he turned from him. He started talking in a high voice to Mrs. Buttifant. She regarded him kindly, with her large deep brown eyes that were so unlike Jane's. Buttifant's mother had whole wells and worlds of feeling lying in those eyes; yet she felt nothing much—it was just accident: the way they were set. She was fat and kind and reposeful and shallow. Her one distinction was a native elegance.Beneath that quiet glance of hers Vaguener became imperceptibly stilled. He ceased to twitch his hands and pull at the lapel of his coat, he talked less boastfully, he no longer quoted the things that he had just now been saying to celebrities. The last time he put his hand up to his coat Jane had snatched it down, then she sniggered,"Why did you wear a frock coat, John-Andrew? Nobody does. I wish you would not. I wish I'd thought to mention it.""You don't generally forget to mention it, Jane." The rest of them felt uncomfortable; there seemed an ugly attitude between brother and sister.The room was emptying. Jane flounced off to say good-bye to certain people that she wanted to stand well with, and to have a last word with Branch.Gabriel remained beside Becca. Buttifant's mother talked to Vaguener. Buttifant in the pauses of his polite dialogue with Becca's mother studied the girl.What a lovely flower she was! Something subtle growing in a garden. He put her in with columbines, Solomon's seal—and all those blossoms that do not flaunt. The world grew mere pretty girls by the bushel; lovely skins, bright eyes, bright hair—what a crop it was! And how common!But this girl Becca, with dull red hair, not a glint in the wicked, sulky mass of it; this girl with little eyes set like the petals of a black pansy, one each side her nose and close to it—and stuck on crooked! This girl with the flawless, yellowed skin and long raggedly cut mouth that was so vividly red! She was peculiar; she was priceless. Gabriel Best was in love with her. She had lost her heart to Vaguener, with his frigidity and his suggested madness. When she lost her heart—it would mean losing it a long way off; not just stooping down and finding it at her feet and replacing it.Buttifant stood quiet, white and little, talking disjointedly to her mother; who thought him well-bred and feeble-minded.He supposed that, as an artist, he ought to have fallen in love with a distinguished-looking girl—and not with this fat, commonplace Jane. Jane—who set his teeth on edge! Jane with her blunt tongue and her raucous laugh and her noisy clothes! It was an astonishing thing, it was part of the whimsicality of the world—but artists never married decorative women. He was going to marry Jane; when he could afford it. Heaven knew when that would be; for his mother and his little brothers at boarding school were expensive to keep up. He would not, once he'd got her, allow Jane to slave for money any more. She should find time to polish herself and keep quiet: she should attain to luminous repose. Vaguener had the same design for his sister. He meant to take Jane in hand when he had made his fortune. They neither of them counted on Jane's hearty and obstinate vulgarity; and on that honest industry of hers. There was another thing—Buttifant brooded upon his chances with Jane—he must overcome her coldness. He'd got to set light to her somehow.Then he heard Becca speak. She was talking to Gabriel about a story of his."You were wrong to let it end unhappily. I know he didn't love her but she loved him. I could make any man greedy if I wanted to. I said so to John-Andrew just now."That was it. Buttifant nodded—and Becca's mother wondered why. He would make Jane greedy—when he found time, and when he could afford to. For the present, here he was being whipped on from day to day doing popular black and white work and paying bills at Dulwich. Even Jane must wait.He watched her waddle across the room towards their group. How badly she walked! And what a dear she was!"We'd better be moving on, Johnny," she said on her high arrogant note. "Is anybody coming our way? You are, Mr. Buttifant?""No; he's coming down to Dulwich with me, aren't you, Arnold?" His mother's quiet voice seemed to take him by the collar. She detested Jane."Oh yes, that's settled, dear, and we'll be going," he returned."We want an omnibus to Oxford Street," Aunt Rebecca said. "You'd better come back with us, Johnny and Jane, to supper.""I—I," Vaguener stammered, "must go straight to Gray's Inn. There's some work I must do."Jane looked at him. "And you've only got three months to do it in." She sounded waggish. "He's going to take another mastership then, Auntie."She snatched at Gabriel's arm. "Let's have dinner together, you and I, Gabriel. I know a place in——""I know lots of places," he stopped her with his irrepressible vitality, "I know London through and through, and the chaps at the eating places know me. I wish," he looked at Becca, "that you'd come too.""She's coming back to Berners Street with me," her mother answered firmly. "If you want to say good-bye to us, Gabriel, come to tea at four to-morrow."They all went together into Piccadilly. Vaguener was left alone at last upon the lighted pavement: in the glare and tumble of the glowing thoroughfare. He stared confusedly, for his head was spinning—and his heart how vengeful it was. How it ached!Jane's last words, Jane's knowing look as she got into the taxi with young Best and drove off, remained with him. She had said,"We'll go and feed and talk about our work, Gabriel."He dug his hands deep into his entirely empty pockets. He walked—fast and desperate—towards Gray's Inn.CHAPTER IVAFTER the party Jane caught cold and took to her bed. This meant that Mrs. Marshall Land Becca did not return to Cornwall; they stayed in London to look after Jane. It meant that Buttifant, his face more like white blotting-paper than usual, was always coming into the set with offerings for the invalid: Vaguener used to grin—t the blots upon Buttifant's face. It meant the visits of a doctor and the threaten of a long bill; for Jane had a touch of bronchitis. It meant that Gabriel Best, on the bare chance of meeting Becca, also came to Gray's Inn with offerings. It meant that Vaguener was wretched and moody and barren and sensitive—believing that they all commented upon him behind his back: also that he was brought to close quarters with Mrs. Welfare, the charwoman.He was not of the stuff that can get diversion out of coarse minds. Mrs. Welfare—in addition to Jane, in addition to everything else—got upon his nerves. He found himself looking back affectionately to those days when Jane had tapped away steadily three hours each morning, driving him mad with her easy vitality.Mrs Welfare used to talk to him when she laid the cloth for his solitary dinner. Jane had a diet of her own; hot stuff, served in a cup. Sometimes Mrs. Welfare warmed it up and sometimes Vaguener did. Sometimes Becca and her mother came along to make special dishes. And they sent to Cornwall for cream.Mrs. Welfare was noisy and capable; she had the useful quality of giving people what she called "the rough side of her tongue."She hated John-Andrew, for she considered that he gave himself airs. He was what she called lackadaisical. And who was he? Now Mr. Buttifant was an affable little chap and Miss Vaguener, poor soul, was a perfect lady. These things she said to Mr. Welfare when she got back to her own fireside in Little Coram Street. She usually found him at home, for he was usually out of a job.All the morning, John-Andrew, now that Jane was ill, would sit by the fire in the parlour reading. He took the deepest chair, he stretched his legs, he, as it were, unbound his brain. He simply would not think of the pile of scribbled on paper in his bedroom; for he meant to give himself a rest. That writing-table by the window, where he had struggled to express himself! He had failed and yet he knew that someíthing strong was there to express. He was a genius—but Jane with her common craft and Mr. Branch with his commercial mind, they dammed him up. He mattered to the world—immensely: but the fool of a world had not felt its need of him yet.If he had only found his chance—as young Best had found his! If he had been less of a genius—he would have been more! If he could have belittled himself and written yarns about people in the Digey and down by the wharf at St. Ives, as Best had done, then he would have been, in the opinion of the world, a far bigger man than Best.Oh it was nothing—all that this farm boy had done! Just to write about firelight in the Stennack cottages; and the sound of the mine at work—hadn't he thought of these things himself and felt them? What was it then Yet Gabriel was flattered and sought after; he was getting rich: while he, John-Andrew Vaguener—the really gifted one—had perfectly empty pockets and had been snubbed, by celebrities at Jane's party. He was laughed at by Mr. Branch and pitied by Buttifant. He had nothing to smoke, he could not even buy a newspaper. When one day his boot lace broke, he felt frenzied, for he had not a penny.Just to write down all the things that came into your head about Cornwall: women standing in the deep, brightly-coloured doorways; wildly vivid rags of washing spread upon the beach; the curing of pilchards in the cellars; the walking of old sailors along the quay—just two or three steps and then back, as if they were on deck: the starry fleet of lighted herring boats floating out at dusk; the reflection from Godrevy lighthouse on your bedroom wall if you lay awake at night; old tales of smuggling and the press-gang; the colour and the joy and the sorrow and the hard work and the hard swearing of those barbarians down there—all these things that Gabriel had noted! What was it after all? He also had seen them and felt them: yes, deeper feeling and more things! The taste of the cream, the tradition of the steaming pasties, yellow saffron buns and the heavy Gold Eyes cake that they eat at harvest time—didn't he know it? And could not an educated man—an Oxford graduate—have made a better job of it than a youth who had carted dung and milked cows and fed the chickens and driven the milk cart over the cobble stones? And fetched water from the reservoir; plenty of it—for his mother's washing day! Vaguener could have wept.His spirit wanted the relief of what a woman would call a good cry. In his mood, Jane would have reddened her nose and swelled her eyes; then she would have tied on a veil and gone off down Regent Street to buy things. Very often—far more often than even Buttifant suspected—Jane's biggest shopípings had been preluded by bitter tears.John-Andrew would never have suspected it; to him Jane was a person who wrote bad fiction and bought worse frocks.He used to sit in the deep chair through these long mornings while she lay in bed. He could hear her coughing; and he could hear Mrs. Welfare making more racket than she need have done while she washed dishes. He seemed to read the paper most assiduously but his brain never contained one single sentence. He was thinking feverishly of his own affairs; he was consumed by horrible inertia and more horrible sufferíing. All his life he had wanted to do something strong, beautiful and compelling; something to make the world stare. He went back in his mind to those days at Oxford when he was blazing with desire to take the family living and teach Christianity, which he believed then to be the loveliest thing the world knew. Jane knew nothing of this. She only knew of his surly curt refusal to take the family living when the time came and—constantly—she still called him a fool. But he knew. Hadn't he been enrapt, aglow! In his own mind, he had been Archíbishop of Canterbury—and higher yet, if it could be. Yes; a great prelate, a great religious influence; a missionary of the S. Francis Assisi sort, a saint also very likely, a hundred years hence! For they still made saints and he had believed that, as the world went on, it would become more spiritual and so there would be more saints. This age of science and dry materialism would drift aside and the sun—of revealed religion—would shine through. In that dazzling age, long after he was dead, the name of John-Andrew Vaguener would shine.He had felt all this, he had believed fervidly: in Christianity, in himself. Then the passionate Faith went. He believed no longer in any dogma: yet he still had left the most glorious belief in himself. So he took to teaching in schools, just as a stop gap, just while he arranged his thoughts. Then he could stand teaching no longer, so he had come to Jane and here he was! And there, through the wall on the writing-table by the narrow window, were those efforts of his brain at which Mr. Branch would not even look. He would smile, wave his fat hand and say blandly, "My dear fellow, there is no market."Already, with this record of total non-achievement, he was weary of writing and his brain got clogged. The same slow death came to his heart over writing as had come to his heart over religion. Yet the strength was there—he'd swear it. He had in him the capacity for great Fame. He would get there. He had not found the right road; that was all.Yet his enthusiasms, so far, had dwindled and died off before they came to fruit. So he began to ask himself if he could by any possibility ever do anything strong. Suppose he turned navvy and took to the pick! Wouldn't paralysis grip him round the waist? Wouldn't the pick fall and smash his own foot—or somebody else's?He was effete, yet he longed for strength—and he would have it. He had not found himself; he wanted putting in the way—that was all.Outside there, beyond the staid confines of this old Square, were strength, labour, achievement and manliness—in ten thousand forms! Yet here he sat, idle, brain-bound. For the life of him he could not stir, although his soul felt dying.These things he thought out through the long mornings, sitting perfectly still, staring at the newsípaper type, jumping nervously when Mrs. Welfare burst open the door at a quarter to one to lay the cloth.Day by day, alone, idle, the grim atmosphere of this old set of chambers blew in his nostrils. Hundreds of lives had been lived here. Men had worked and suffered and laughed and sinned. The terror and wonder of old walls took hold of him.He went out into the kitchen one day after dinner to fetch his boots; for he was going to the Museum. Mrs. Welfare had not cleaned them.She left off her dish washing, wiped her hands on the round towel behind the door and started brushing with a flourish.He stood, limp, by the table watching her; for he might as well stand there as anywhere else! It occurred to him—as a distant fantastic speculation—that for a man to stand idle while a woman brushed his boots was perhaps contemptible. And he did not even pay Mrs. Welfare for doing it. Jane paid. Mrs. Welfare, brushing vigorously, spoke of Jane."Are you going out all the afternoon? I don't think she ought to be left. I don't like her looks.""She'll be all right; don't trouble to put on too much polish," he held out his hands for his boots; he wanted to get away from Mrs. Welfare. "She's had her broth, hasn't she? And I'll be back to tea. Besides, Mrs. Marshall may come in; she's got a key.""Me and Mrs. Marshall has had more than one talk." Mrs. Welfare kept her hand in the boot and looked at John-Andrew steadily. 'Your sister, if you'll excuse me, she works too hard. She wants taking care of, poor lady. I call her a lady, though she works hard for her living like the rest of us. Yes, many a woman,"Mrs. Welfare's voice rose," works her fingers to the bone for some beast of a husband, but——""My good Mrs. Welfare, Miss Vaguener hasn't got a husband. Give me that boot. You start on the second one."He took the boot from her; warm from her hand."There's Mr. Welfare," mud flew off the second boot and made the kitchen brown, "he isn't what you may call a model man, but he'll wait on me hand and foot, mind you.""Will he?"'Yes he will. And if I've got so much as a sick headache he's that upset. I've often seen tears in his eyes.""Really! I don't care about blacking. Is it done?""Done! I ain't started, and you want a new lace." She spat on the brush, then dug it into the blacking tin. "And he says to me often enough, 'You take a day in bed, Annie.' But I can't take a day in bed, Mr. Vaguener, or where would the home be? For Mr. Welfare's work is fitful. It's the same here, if you'll excuse me; that poor lady she's worrying about her home. Oh I can understand, bless you, for I've been through it. When I took the broth in yesterday afternoon while you was out she ses,'Give me a sheet of paper off my desk in the next room, there's a dear soul, Mrs. Welfare.' And I wouldn't, but she come out and fetched it herself. Why, what wonderful brains they've got, her and Mr. Buttifant—but you can work a brain too far.""That's a beautiful polish and I can't wait for any more."Vaguener shot out his shaking hand; small and strong and cruel.His face was dead white and his little eyes had an expression which impressed Mrs. Welfare."Crafty I call 'em," she said to Mr. Welfare that evening as they sat in Little Coram Street. "And I don't pretend to understand him.""She'll have," Mrs. Welfare's last words were pitched high and spoken into John-Andrew's back, "a nervous breakdown if she keeps on;—and that's only a new-fangled name for going up the pole, mark you.""Up the pole?"He turned round blandly at the door, his flashing boots in his hand."Off your nut," explained Mrs. Welfare, flourishing back to the sink. "She's had more than she can stand, that's my opinion, and so I said to Mrs. Marshall. I speak my mind, without fear or favour, Mr. Vaguener. That's my way."She wheeled round with a dish in her hand which she wiped. She met his glance with a stolid glare."He can't give me notice," she chuckled when she heard him go out; banging the door and then proceeding down the stairs. "He doesn't pay me. And how a man can bring himself to live on a woman unless she's his wife, that beats me."She sighed; thinking of Mr. Welfare. For keeping a man was hard labour, married or not!John-Andrew went out into South Square, he filtered into Holborn.And, in the way he had, he noticed everything he saw; yet he no longer rejoiced in it—for what was the good? He had, so Mr. Branch declared, no market. His thoughts were no good to him unless he could communicate them to the world and so command its homage.He wanted everything that Fame brought, he wanted what that damned young Best had got—and with so little trouble. He wanted to be warmed by flattery and he wanted his pockets filled. He kept one hand in his pocket and he discovered grimly that there was a hole in it—which really did not matter at all, since the pocket was empty.He could not to-day go to the Museum and commune with the thoughts of dead men. He went walking on, delicately commenting in his mind on the subtle differences between Holborn and Oxford Street. Differences in the women! In their voices and their dress and the way they walked. East of Tottenham Court Road, so it seemed to him, every woman was like his sister Jane—plebeian and assertive. He got into Bond Street and looked in the shops. Poor dear vulgar Jane! What a passion she had for clothes. Some day he would buy her a whole shop window full. He would draw a cheque, wave his hand at the window and say, 'Send it home.' Yes, that some day should come! Before Heaven it must-or he would not live! For what was life if you went aimlessly down Bond Street on a blowy March day with a hole in your pocket: a hole that did not matter?He got to Piccadilly and went into the Green Park. It was cold but he sat down; for the seats were empty. There were no sniggering nursemaids to-day; to stare at him as he walked by, to notice that his bootílace was broken.He sat down and then his heart jumped and his eyes got dangerously hot. For he saw a purse on the path at his foot. He touched it with his walking-stick, he looked round him covertly, he drew it with the stick behind his boot and then he stooped to tinker with that broken lace. He need not have been so careful, for no one was in sight. When he sat up again and when the purse was in his pocket his swift glance searched round childishly for a policeman.He got up and walked on. He came out of the Park by another gate and when he was well away from it, he took the purse out of his pocket. It was poor and worn; there were three half-crowns in it.He walked briskly back towards Gray's Inn; the world had changed. He went into a tobacconist's and bought a quarter of a pound tin of tobacco and some cigarette papers. He went into a draper's and asked solemnly, "How do you sell bootlaces?" They said a penny a pair, so he bought a dozen; for he would spare himself a repetition of that particular shame! He bought of a flower girl a bunch of daffodils and some violets, he went to a fruiterer's for tangerine oranges. Jane loved them. In the big draper's shop which is nearest Gray's Inn he saw some ribbon going cheap. It was bright blue with magenta roses on it; and just the gaudy childish stuff to allure Jane. So he had half a dozen yards. Finally he went to the caféat the corner near Mudie's for a bag of their twoípenny pastries; Jane patronised that place. Loaded and again nearly penniless, glowing at the prospect of Jane's frank delight, he turned into South Square.He very often was a brute to Jane; yet he never meant it, his heart did not sin against her. When he was successful—and it might be soon, for these things always came suddenly—he would be the gentlest, the most generous brother on earth. He would show her! Jane should have the time of her life! But she must not get in his way. She must never dare criticise his work or compare it with her own. For his work was a sacred thing; it was his soul. He would not allow her to mention it. She would read it of course.He let himself into the set and went into Jane's bedroom. She was sitting up in bed and Becca was with her. Becca's hat was off and her thick red hair was twisted round her head in some wonderful way. It looked like a turban of strangely-dyed stuff. A little rose colour crept into the yellow of her skin when she nodded at John-Andrew, when he said laconically, "Hallo, Becca."He walked to the bedside. Jane did not look so bad in bed. That blue flannel jacket matched her eyes, which was a great point. Her hair was in a pigítail. How much better women looked without their trappings! Jane in a nightgown was almost refined, she was bearable. He smiled at her fondly, he tumbled his offerings on the quilt."Flowers," he said, in a warmth, with a smile, with his face changing, "and cakes and some ribbon.""Well really, Johnny, you are a dear!" Jane glowed at him. "I'd kiss you only you'd catch my cold. Put the cakes out on a plate, Becca; we'll have them for tea. I feel lots better to-day. I shall get up to-morrow. I should be all right if I could sleep; he has to give me stuff to make me sleep. Put the flowers in water, Becca. And Becca," she was unrolling the ribbon, "give me a back glass. John-Andrew, you have got taste. Hasn't he, Becca?'Becca came to the bed with the glass. She was smiling; they were all radiant; love glowed in the room. John-Andrew could not believe that, only this morning, he had suffered so enormously in that other room just through the wall. He could not believe that Mrs. Welfare had insulted him in the kitchen while she polished his boots. He looked round this bedroom of Jane's; quaint and small and dainty, with the clear fire burning, with the smell of perfume in the air. Jane made a point of perfume; perhaps too great a point.It was a pretty room, with a corner fireplace and panelled walls and a recess: in it Jane hung her frocks and things. In a corner cupboard which had charming shelves and no door, she kept cosmetics; all the fal-lals of a chemist's shop. Jane was always up to dodges with her complexion; she did everyíthing but paint. She had hair washes and manicure sets and all sorts of things. Vaguener smiled at the loaded shelves of Jane's mystery cupboard; he might have been her lover. She was sitting bolt up in the bed and shouting gleefully,"Isn't it just the blue to go with my jacket, Becca? If I had a knot here at the neck—give me a pin! Doesn't that set it off?" she held the glass to her throat and simpered. "I look awfully nice in bed. Do say you think so, Johnny. But you don't matter. What a pity Mr. Buttifant can't see me! People are kind. Just look at what Mr. Buttifant sent in this afternoon."She put the glass down and pointed to a little table beside the bed. A pot of honey stood on it and a water-colour sketch."He's a charming man"—Becca, speaking after Jane, sounded subdued; John-Andrew surveyed her gratefully. "He just came to the door to ask how Jane was and send her in these. He was in Sussex yesterday and he bought the honey somewhere—where was it I told you, Jane?""Rustington; that's Littlehampton way. He often goes down there," said Jane, in that glad screech of hers and with the knot of new ribbon at her throat. "Just look at the water-colour, Johnny. I don't care for his water-colours. He thinks they're good but——""No he doesn't; he can't make them out. Damned bad or devilish good; I think that's what he said to me," Vaguener told her and he picked up the sketch.He found in it the soothing and the vivid quality which appealed to him—ignorant though he was of technique—in Buttifant's water-colour work. It was just a swoop of gulls following the plough across the wintry earth."He hasn't got an eye for colour. Whoever saw violet earth?" asked Jane dogmatically. "I like," she laughed, "the honey best. I've had a spoonful. He bought it down there of a woman who keeps bees and he carried it home on his handle-bar. But as to work—we none of us know our good from our bad. His strength is black and white. I've told him so.""Don't we know our good from our bad?" Vaguener was gloating over the plough-land."Our good from our bad!" Jane laughed till she coughed. "Oh Johnny, you old dear!" The water stood in her eyes and she wheezed. "Why you don't do any work worth talking about. It is only playing round. But your three months' grace is nearly up. He's going to get another school after Easter, Becca?""Is he?" The girl spoke strangely; she stood staring at John-Andrew.Her face was trying to tell him things. But his eyes remained fast upon Buttifant's wonderful violet earth and airy gulls—those birds that were flying points of pearl and silver.Jane collapsed on her pillow."Oh let's have our tea, Becca. I'm not up to much yet, after all. Don't look sulky, John-Andrew, for you know I don't mind keeping you. And I'm so touched with all the things you've brought me. And I didn't know you had any money. Why, Johnny!" she sat up a little, "you said the other day you had no money. Don't you know we made a joke of it, you and I and Mr. Buttifant?""You made a joke of it. We didn't.""No you didn't; men never have much sense of humour, have they, Becca? How quiet you are, Becca! Well, but you did say you had not a penny, John-Andrew, and I told you where I kept my odd change and told you to help yourself. I said, 'I shan't count it, so you can feel quite comfortable. Go there whenever you like.'""I found a purse this afternoon," said Vaguener, standing by the round table and with Buttifant's painting flapping between his ringer and thumb.'You found a purse! Put that picture down; you make my eyes jump, moving it about.""You found a purse," said Becca, taking the picture softly from him."Did you take it to Scotland Yard?" asked Jane. "That's the proper thing to do.""Scotland Yard!" his great noisy bitter laugh tilled the little room. "It fell out of an angel's pocket for my salvation, that's what I feel.""Your salvation! What an old duffer you are! If you wanted money, why on earth didn't you help yourself from the right-hand top drawer inside my roll-top desk? Haven't I said so?"Becca kept close to him. Her face was lovely with compassion. John-Andrew never looked at it. Nor did he look at the bed, he was looking at the putty-painted walls."So you didn't take it to Scotland Yard! Let me look at it," Jane said to him."There were three half-crowns inside. I threw the purse away.""You threw it away! Upon my word, Johnny, you know the tricks of the trade." Jane laughed till she spluttered. "And you've spent the half-crowns! So all my pretty things are stolen property.""And I bought myself some bootlaces and this." Vaguener spoke grimly and he brought out of his pocket the pink tin of tobacco.Jane and Becca watched him—in such different ways!The girl made a quick movement. Jane's blue eyes, from the bed, were hard and bright."I shall never understand you," she said, "and that seems wrong between a brother and sister. Make the tea, Becca." She became suddenly weary. "When we've had it, do you mind taking some stuff round to Branch for me, Johnny? He doesn't leave his office till six. And tell him to get it typed. I've only done it in pencil, lying here in bed.""Yes, I'll take it. Where is it? I'll go now.""No, you won't, we'll have tea first. It's in my desk with my other papers and it's packed up ready. I get out of bed sometimes in the afternoon, when you've gone to the Museum and before Aunt Becca comes. I just go through my papers."Jane sighed."I mustn't be ill long," she added. "Or I may fall out.""Fall out of what? Bed?" asked Becca lightly."It is all very well for you." Jane was jolly and bitter upon a note. "Your father had plenty of money; John-Andrew and I have none. If Branch thought I was sickly he'd think I was done for and so I should be; for the first thing that goes is your imagination. And yet," she sat up more on her pillow and looked at Vaguener and Becca sharply, "I do think of the most original things while I'm lying here in bed.""Mother would say you'd got a temperature," Becca told her sensibly and poured out her tea and put it on the little table near the bed.After tea Vaguener went off to Branch's office with the instalment of Jane's serial. When she and her cousin Jane were alone in the little panelled room Becca sat by the fire looking at the flames."Penny for your thoughts," said Jane. Becca stared up."You could turn my thoughts into pounds, Jane. If I talk I shall give you the true touch. I won't have you put me into one of your horrid stories and yet——"Becca started up, standing midway between fire and bed; light from the little flames bobbing on her face. She was looking blankly at the window; the window caked outside with mud."But I must talk," suddenly she was on her knees by the bed, her face burrowed in the quilt, her flaming hair touching it."What is it, old girl?" asked Jane.The words were common, the voice was metallic; yet there was understanding somewhere."It's Johnny," said the girl in a marvellous whisper. "Johnny! Haven't you guessed?Doesn't everyíbody see it? Why, when he comes near me I shake, I can't help it. I worship him, Jane. You don't know what that means; you're an old maid, just as mother is an old maid. Her getting married and our being born—Kenneth and me—hasn't made any difference. Nothing can."There was vigour and contempt and pain in the deep young voice.Jane lay still, upon her back, in the warm bed.Just for once, she had not a word to say. She watched and was keen, she listened painfully, striving to remember every word. She instinctively put her hand under her pillow for the pencil and the penny account book that she kept there. She made notes in it. Directly Becca was gone she would write down every word, she would add her own description. Nothing was sacred to Jane. She was feeling, 'Here's a good curtain.'"You don't understand, you'll be disgusted," Becca went on talking with her mouth against the bed-clothes. "My sort of woman disgusts the other sort—and yet you disgust us——""We—who?And us—what do you mean? I Jane asked."There's a gulf," Becca said, "between the two sorts. When I tell you that I love John-Andrew, when I own that—yes, when you sent me into his room just now to wash my hands I kissed the soap—there!—you think me mad and coarse. Now you do, don't you?""I think it isn't modest." Jane sounded affronted. "I think it's nasty," she added, "if you ask me.""Very likely. When I am old I may think so too. And yet I shan't, because I shall remember all my hot pain. I may want it back." Becca jumped up and went to the window. She stood looking out through the caked mud on the pane. "As to being nasty! People like you, Jane, shock me all the time. Call modesty an instrument—and say we play different tunes."Jane's face said, 'I'll remember that.'Her lips uttered,"You're clever! I've always thought so.""Never mind that. People like you—prudes, as you and mother are—are coy and coarse and sexless and clumsy—I can't say it.""Different tunes; stick to that," said Jane. "It's good.""When you talk about love——" flamed Becca."Never talk about it; doesn't interest me.""When you write about it you are like a puppy—your legs are all over the place. You don't know what to imply or when to stop."Becca flung round, hurrying hotly back to the fire."I'm miserable," she said, "miserable. He doesn't care about me. He is indifferent—except when he is repelled. He thinks—as you think—that I'm not modest. Jane, when any one is in love, as I'm in love, she's just a lump of sheer molten modesty. She's the purest thing on earth. I don't know what I'm saying."The girl clapped up her hands to her face."You are saying it uncommonly well.""Gabriel Best feels about me as I feel about John-Andrew. He'll put it in a book. I can't think how you people can put all your feelings into books, for any one to read.""I don't put my feelings into books.""You haven't got any feelings. I meant Gabriel.""Oh, Gabriel!" Jane's voice was concentrated. "He won't last. He is a flash in the pan. It is just one book and then journalism. That is what Branch said of Gabriel and he knows. He can reckon up any writer you choose to name; just as if he were a butcher's bill.""It's an awful life, this writing life." Becca was talking fast and poking her flaming face near the fire. "I was thinking it out in bed last night. I wake in the middle of the night and cry. I'm telling you everything, Jane, I don't care what I say. It seems as if I must talk....""What were you thinking out about our life?" asked Jane, prompting her."Oh nothing; but you all live in a long street, so it seems to me, Cackle Street. All of you laying eggs and seeing who can cackle loudest. Mr. Branch coming along with a basket.""Cackle Street! Um! You get lots of ideas, Becca.""I'm half mad—and who is more inventive than a lunatic! Isn't it any good, Jane?""Isn't what any good?""Me—and Johnny.""Good! Why, Becca, he hasn't got a penny. When these half-crowns have gone he'll be borrowing of me. And I really do think that's the limit. I don't mind—but Johnny ought to. If he gets another job as an usher after Easter, he won't keep it. If he did he couldn't marry," said Jane."I've got a little money. What's money? It isn't anything to do with that. If Johnny loved me, if we could climb up Rosewall in the sun, if we could sit on a ledge of rock down by Clodgy, if——""My dear child, he doesn't love you. He never will love you or anybody else. It isn't in him. He can't digest love—just as some people can't digest roast pork." Jane laughed laboriously."I'd roast it so nicely," Becca said, with a desolate laugh, "I'd make him greedy, I told him so.""You repeated it to Gabriel Best so Mr. Buttifant told me. Gabriel will put it into a book.""You all of you put everything in wrong. I shall be in your next story. You'll make me a shameless and gawky young person. You'll make me say smart things.""I won't put you in at all if you'd rather not," said Jane generously.She meant it. Yet she knew within herself, that she would never be able to resist Becca as a useful bit of 'copy.'"As to Johnny," she continued in a sensible way, "you go back to Cornwall and forget. He isn't worth your feeling.""Don't suppose they ever are." Becca was cynical. "I love him, I want him—and that's enough. You can't imagine how magic he is to me, Jane.""He's no good to you, he's no good to any woman. I don't say he wouldn't marry you—to live on you—if things got bad enough," said Jane."I'd rather have him that way than not at all. He's the one big thing to me. He matters. Don't you see?""I should hate to see." Steely cold disgust was in Jane's blue eyes. "If I felt like that," she added, with more subtlety than she usually showed, "I should feel ashamed of being a woman. For it is——""Don't say one more word." Becca's long hands shot out. "It is sure to be the wrong word and I shall want to murder you."Becca got up, she fetched a bottle from the wash-stand. "Time for your tonic, Jane."She measured it and Jane drank."I'm sick of celibacy—married or single," Becca broke out. "Mother and Kenneth are such icebergs. Kenneth with his natural tonsure that he's so idiotically proud of, mother with her cool references to father. She loves me and Kenneth, but she modestly wishes that she'd picked us off a tree. And you are as bad, Jane.""And Johnny," added Jane."Johnny's different," Becca said.The slow colour surged over her face. Jane could see her lips, red and thick and long, all quivering."Sometimes, when he is in a human mood—which doesn't happen often," Becca's voice rose and malicious amusement danced in her small, petal-like black eyes, "Kenneth sings old love songs and sings them very well. He's got a delicious tenor. The night before we came away he sang that one of Purcell's; about bringing down the stars to 'make them shamed by the fire in her eyes.' I noticed the humble apology in his voice now and then and the revolting shyness. When he had finished, mother said she thought it was melo-dramatic and unreal; that no man would care so much and that it was a pity such things were ever written. I turned round on them. I hated their simpering, shocked faces. They were regarding each other in a mood of sympathetic pain. It seemed as if Kenneth apologised and mother forgave him. I said, 'It depends on what you want, doesn't it? And what you suppose you were sent into this world for? I want that sort of thing and I'll have it. A man may pull down whole bunches of constellations for me. Don't blush like that, mother; I detest a blush in the wrong place. Nothing can be more degrading. 'Then I went out of the room before they had time to answer, I went and lay on my bed; I was shaking and burning. I felt so reckless—and I couldn't have told you why. Mother and Kenneth were talking underneath. They were affectionately discussing what they would do with me. I know they were feeling dirty; for I had dragged out a topic that they keep in the lumber-room.""Foreign travel is the thing for you," said Jane"Foreign travel! The spirit of John-Andrew would follow me all over the earth. And I'd follow any man who looked like him. Can't you see?""See! It's sheer madness and it isn't nice." Jane was distressed.Becca laughed at her brutally. She did not look Pretty. She looked passionate and wild and savage. Jane felt this: Becca was not girlish. Jane had a professional standard for girls."You don't look like an Englishwoman, Becca.""I'm just a savage, Jane. You can't bear a sight of primitive instinct. Get up and dress yourself and go down Oxford Street and buy something ready-made for my shameless soul to wear."Becca burst out crying, making a childish noise."My dear—don't!" Jane was touched. "It's—it's only a fancy. You are young and you'll——""No, I shan't get over it. Spare yourself the trouble of saying that. And I'm not young—in the way you mean. And I'm not an Englishwoman—of the sort you mean. Neither are you. They make queer men and women down in Cornwall. A touch of wild, a touch of bitter, a lot of cool and sour. Nobody's normal. We have our grandfather to thank for a good deal. And we have the way we are mixed. Foreign sailors and Cornish girls and——""Oh, Becca, don't—don't.""Well then I won't—won't." Becca wiped her eyes furiously and put her handkerchief away. "I'll go to Berner's Street and read aloud to mother. It is the Life of a Missionary and he was a most godly man. I won't wait until John-Andrew comes back. Let me go at once." She found her hat and pinned it on in a passionate flurry before the glass. "Have you got everything you want, Jane? Can you manage until he comes back? How big my mouth looks! How bright my eyes are!""I don't want anything, dear." Jane seemed chastened.Becca bent over and kissed her.Jane turned her head away. She proffered to Becca her unalluring jaw.Becca was sharp and saw tears on the pillow."Why are you crying? There isn't a Johnny for you.""I don't know, Becca. Certainly not over a man. I wouldn't be such a fool. It is the cold: a bad cold does weaken you. And then I worry sometimes.""Why? Stupid money?""Money is only stupid when you've got it, and it isn't only over money; it's—everything. It's Branch—in case he didn't—oh you know! And it is my work—you don't understand that. I want to do really good work and there isn't time. I lie here and think." Jane sniffed. "And even if John-Andrew pokes the fire in the next room I jump like mad and I wonder how much coal he is burning. I hate him for burning away the coal.""There's only one remedy for you." Becca was looking at her in thoughtful concern. "Marry Mr. Buttifant.""Marry! Becca—don't!""There you go again! Mother and Kenneth and John-Andrew and you! I've got the wild and bitter. The cool and sour belongs to the rest of the family. What is the matter with Mr. Buttifant? He is well bred, well off, well meaning." Becca was caustically ticking off Buttifant's qualities. "But he's got one thing against him—he's a man. You can't forgive that, Jane, and he can't cure it.""I don't want to marry." Jane frowned. "All I want is a hundred and fifty a year certain; without lifting a finger. Then I could be as happy as a queen.""Notoriously unhappy persons." Becca had dried her eyes and was flippant.She touched Jane's jaw with her blazing mouth and went to the door."If I meet Johnny on the stairs I shall cut him dead," she said shrilly.Jane heard her laughing as she went along the passage.Becca was not a bit like other girls. Jane lay pondering. Would Becca go well in a serial story?CHAPTER VBUTTIFANT one day in June went down to Dulwich to spend a week-end with his mother. The house at Dulwich, perfect in its equipment and always in want of something, for which he must pay, amused him, although he could never say why. He loved and admired his mother. But was he going to keep on at cheap black and white work—cheap in conception, rich in pay—all his life so that he might keep his delightful mother? She was no joke to keep. He wondered what her particular demand would be to-day! And the boys at boarding school were no joke to keep.He walked along thinking of his water-colours and thinking of Jane, who did not fit in with his enthusiasms. She told him bluntly, laughing, open-mouthed, in his quiet white face, that she could paint better water-colours herself, if only she had time to go into the country and look at trees and cows and birds and cottages and things. Jane robustly believed that she could do anything if only she had time. She twitted him with a holiday in Cornwall that she would take some day; and the canvases she would bring back.He thought of Jane forlornly and tenderly; with a vast longing. He ached to take care of her; he wanted to pay for her. How happy he could be were he walking towards a house—any sort of house and anywhere—with Jane as its mistress and his wife. If Jane trod upon his artistic corns, he would just laugh and cuddle her up. He would take pens and manuscript paper clean out of the house; she should not write a single line. As to a typewriter! Not one of those infernal machines should tap within a mile of their dwelling.It was a delicious summer afternoon. The gardens in Dulwich were gay. Women were frivolously dressed and they all seemed to be laughing. Jane was up there in South Square, working with such superbly vulgar enthusiasm: working for herself and for Vaguener; putting by for her old age. She was not thirty, yet she already had the full terror of the forties. She was so pitifully nervous for the future; she had scraped together a few hundreds; her voice wavered if she referred to her investments. Her idea was to save a thousand and buy an annuity for two pounds a week when she was sixty. The terror about money made one of Jane's infrequent subtleties.Buttifant turned in at his mother's gate, he opened the door. He could tell by the manner of the maid he met in the hall that something was afoot. His mother's servant was smart and well trained; she wore the nicest thing in caps. Mrs. Buttifant ran her little house elegantly."Is my mother in the drawing-room?" asked Buttifant."Yes, sir, with a gentleman."He wondered what gentleman and why; for they had very few friends, he and his mother.He went into the drawing-room and he saw her on sofa, with the pretty old mahogany table in front of her and the tea things set out.She had few possessions but they were beautiful: with a fastidious beauty that reminded Buttifant of Becca Marshall—a rareness in both cases, not to be comprehended by persons of the Jane sort. Jane, if she could see his mother's drawing-room, would shout criticisms: she would good-temperedly offer to bring it up to date, for no room was complete without the latest fandangle-dum!Buttifant saw, in addition to the family furniture, the family silver and the family china. He loved the look of his mother's Rockingham cups; their buff and green—the curly shape of the teapot and big sugar bowl—soothed him. They seemed to rest his eyes: he judged things and people by the effect on his eyes, which were his sensitive part and always tired. Yet he had a passion for Jane, with her misapplied violence of attire!His mother was handsome, in a handsome setting. She was fat and—as Jane surmised—she was uncorseted. Her gently voluptuous outlines made her principal charm. Yet she was charming altogether, so her son thought. He loved her dear double chin and the tiny little wrinkling of her throat—for she was no longer young. He loved her brown eyes with their serious deep sweetness—which meant nothing; for she was selfish and shallow. She appealed to Buttifant, just as Jane appealed. He had a trick of pouring deep feeling into flimsy phials.He walked across the room admiring her. Then he turned his head to look at the stout and stumpy middle-aged man who sat near her. And he realised, with a son's shock, that this stranger admired her infinitely more than he did. Whoever he was, he loved and reverenced her. His face expressed that he was suffering from an affair of long standing."Arnold, you dear boy! I didn't expect you for hours. I thought the black and white work would keep you to that tiresome easel until dusk. Let me introduce Commander Attfield. You don't remember him, but he has a perfect recollection of you. Haven't you, William?"She was smiling and fat and unperturbed; a little more fluent than usual. And that was all. As the men shook hands, she took up her Rockingham teapot, with the delicate handle and the lumpy gilt knob on the lid. She poured with a steady hand."Last time I saw you," Commander Attfield looked narrowly at Arnold, "you were in long clothes. I was your godfather—almost."He laughed; a jolly sea laugh. Yet it was rueful."We would have asked you to be a godfather if we'd known in time that you'd consent." Arnold's mother regarded the Commander with calm open affection."And you've never seen my other boys, William. By the way, Arnold, I've had such good news of Reggie. He's got a scholarship. And the headmaster thinks awfully well of Bernie too."Reginald and Bernard were his younger brothers. Buttifant looked relieved; he foresaw a lessening of school bills."You remember, William, how capricious I always was and that I did unexpected things?" She smiled on her visitor, who sat still, balancing his teacup on his knee and looking at her with frank homage. "These two younger boys are years younger than Arnold. They were born after I'd given up such things-They were a great shock and a great inconvenience. Then the Dean dying soon after and with his affairs in a muddle, made it worse. We all three, the small boys and I, dumped down on Arnold. We've been a great expense, haven't we, dear? But I see the end of it.""Well, Reginald's got a scholarship," said Arnold, looking at her in his blank quiet way and with a red spot on one white cheek.He was wondering. He looked at the unromantic-featured sailor who was so frankly in love with his mother.He liked the look of Commander Attfield, who was a middle-aged man of the fresh, clean type. He had clear blue eyes—that suggested a twinkle in his normal moments: he was not normal now! He had a neat white beard cut close and pointed; his complexion was ruddy, his features small and irreproachable."A scholarship! But that isn't the only end." Commander Attfield laughed like a boy. "Tell him, Aggie.""I shall tell him when you've gone. And you must call me Agatha. Don't you remember I always hated abbreviations?""I remember—but I've thought of you as Aggie for thirty years.""Thirty years! Good gracious!" said Arnold's mother.Into the unbroken cream of her smooth face the colour came. She was blushing; she could still blush and she was fifty. Arnold sat admiring her and feeling sorry for Commander Attfield—who had evidently been badly treated in the past. And he was diverted by his mother's skilful way of instantly turning their talk into a shallow social channel. She chattered away; of the people at Dulwich, of Jane up in Gray's Inn; and Jane's bad cold and Jane's tea-party in Piccadilly; and that extraordinary girl with the red hair. Did Arnold admire her? And didn't he think her mother a nice soul? And what did he make of the famous plough-boy? Had he brought down the book of Cornish stories? He forgot them last time.She kept this up until Commander Attfield reluctantly declared he must go back to town. She looked at him."You'll come again soon, William?""I'll come to-morrow if you'll let me." He had no pride: this was his delightful lover's attribute."May he come, Arnold?""Do come," said Arnold, standing up, surveying them in his imperturbable way."I'll take you to the door," his mother said to her admirer.She walked across the room, managing her overíflowing figure, looking queenly, as she always did. This was something to do with her skeleton, thought Arnold anatomically, but it was more to do with that frock she wore. Jane would have called it a horribly dowdy affair—and he had the expensive bill for it up in Gray's Inn! He must pay that bill. He would remember to draw the cheque on Monday. They went out; quite with the air of lovers. He remained, marvelling. When his mother returned, she asked him the inevitable question,"What do you make of him?""Nice old chap!""Old!"—she winced."Yes, I suppose he is.""Well, never mind, dear. Age is a matter of feeling; so he's under twenty-five," said Arnold."Yes, isn't he absurd? You can't control him. I'm sure that even Esther guesses."Esther was the maid."I'm sure she does. I met her in the hall as I came in.""She didn't say anything?""Say! Of course not. No maid of yours would be indiscreet. She expressed; that's all.""It is ridiculous," Mrs. Buttifant sat down behind her tea-tray."Have another cup, do. Plenty here. Won't you? Well, I will.""Are you going to marry him, mother?""I must. I ought to have done it thirty years ago. Then your father came along and I liked him ever so much better, so——""You threw this sailor fellow overboard?""I did. You'll have a great contempt for me. I threw him over although our wedding day was fixed.""And he forgave you? He was willing to be godfather to the first brat—me—that arrived!""He was. Truly Christian, isn't it? It makes me feel so ashamed. It makes me grateful; and willing to do anything for him. You understand?""That you are going to marry him? I suppose so. When?""Well, he says soon—at once.""I don't blame him. A thirty years' engagement.""Don't say that. It sounds improper. I must marry him or people will talk, old as we are. It is such a tiresomely scurrilous world. But I don't want to marry. I would much rather have him as a paying—a very—paying guest.""Would he be a—very—paying?""He is equal to anything." Her calm eyes looked more pensive than usual."He has come into a fortune; left by a relative in New Zealand. The sort of thing you read about in the paper.""Very often it is only paper. Has he got it?"' Years ago. And he has never married, Arnold. Quite touching! When he heard that I was a widow, he took the next boat home. I forget where he was; Burmah I think.""How long since he came back? You never told me.""I have deceived you, dearest, I admit; for it seemed so utterly absurd at our age. I'm afraid he's been back three months, Arnold.""And having tea here every day? Don't the Dulwich tongues wag?"' You know I've never really mixed with Dulwich. He hasn't been every day. Just before you came in I promised to marry him as soon as we could. How soon—can we, Arnold?""He's found that out already,"said Arnold.He looked at her, in her pretty amplitude. What a delicious mother for a man to have—and what a dead weight!"I shall lose you,"he said."The Commander will whisk you away to what is known as foreign parts. Or he will settle in some dead relaxing place full of half-pays—say Cheltenham.""He isn't a half-pay."His mother was gleeful."You won't have to pay a penny more either for me or the boys. You'll be able to get married yourself. But don't let it be to that vulgar Miss Vaguener."Arnold's face went blotchy. It was pink and white like a clown's. This meant feeling. His mother knew this and so did Vaguener. Swiftly through her head ran the thought that if Arnold was really going to give her such an impossible daughter-in-law, she and Commander Attfield would be compelled to live a great deal abroad."I'm afraid it will have to be Miss Vaguener, mother."Her son was solemn. Underneath, he was uproariously glad. Thoughts flashed through his head. His brain was a summer storm. He could go straight back to Gray's Inn on Monday. He could say to his dear fat commonplace Jane—his cold Jane—with her touch of the shrew—' marry me.' And he would make her do it. When she had done it, he would draw her into a flaming kingdom."Why?"asked his mother."She isn't even a lady—and that word does mean something, still. Won't the red-haired cousin do?""The red-haired cousin is in love with John-Andrew. And Gabriel Best is in love with her. Love is nothing but a variety entertainment; you ought to have learnt that.""My dear Arnold, when a woman comes to my age, she doesn't know which she's loved or when. Or even—if. I threw over William Attfield for your poor father, but I don't know now that I would throw over either for both! Is that clear?""Not quite. You mean that you love Attfield best?""Very likely. But I may not have loved either. Or perhaps it was both. I shall marry William and be very comfortable. I've only loved one man—and it is you. That is what mother's come to.""I shall never be a mother; so you've got to let me have Jane, if she'll have me.""Have you! Why of course.""Not so sure."Arnold looked anxious."She's a natural celibate. With all her vanity, with all the ridiculous fuss the dear thing makes about her plain face and worse figure, Jane's a celibate. Overflowing vanity, but no mating instinct."' You don't sound like a lover."His mother stared."You've been spoiled by Commander Attfield and my father. But—do think! If I can love Jane, seeing her demerits so ruthlessly, love her in spite of anything she wears, don't you see what a sound love it is!""The things she wears!"his mother was melodiously derisive."A chestnut brown hat and a grass green veil last time I saw her.""Very likely. Any touches of pink about? That would be Jane.""Arnold, you are clever! There were touches of pink. A pink and black collar on a grey coat.""I can stand it all. I could stand red geraniums in the chestnut brown hat,"he declared robustly."But what on earth does love mean if——""Oh now you've asked a question, mother.""She's plain and noisy and vulgar and ill dressed and yet you——""Want her more than anything else and mean to have her if she'll let me. She's so brave and so busy, the poor little soul. She's packed full of pathos. A cheap packing case—but riches inside! You don't sec her best side.""She isn't a poor little soul. She is a lumpy young woman and her voice goes through my head like a hooter.""So it does through mine."They burst out laughing."We can't explain love,"Buttifant said, when they left off."I admit she is worthy."Mrs. Buttifant looked thoughtful."It is good of her to keep that eccentric brother. Is he really clever, Arnold?""I don't think so."Buttifant was frank."That's the trouble.""What trouble?""Well, you see he thinks he is and perhaps Nature intended him to be, only——""Something's put a spoke in Nature's wheel.""Exactly. You seem to understand.""I felt sorry for him, Arnold, that day at the party. He was such a fish out of water. And Miss Vaguener was so strident and the plough-boy—what's his name, Gabriel Best—bragged so. Has he got a post yet?""Vaguener? No. I don't think he means to get one. I shall have to keep both him and Jane.""Jane! You call her that?""No, I don't, only in my heart. I call her Miss Vaguener. She is most particular.""Then she isn't what they call Bohemian. I am glad of that; for it always seems to mean getting up late and not dressing properly for breakfast and not bothering about dusting the furniture."Jane goes round with a duster ever- morning—or she did until lately,"said Buttifant."The Vagueners are of clerical stock, as we are. Jane—I'll call her that to you—ought to be paying calls and dabbling in good works in the suburbs somewhere. The perversity of her stock——""Thought you said it was clerical.""Yes; but the grandfather was an odd card. The result is that Jane is up in Gray's Inn working herself to death over abominably bad work and John-Andrew is living on the proceeds.""Well, if you do marry her, you won't keep either him or her, Arnold. That is absurd. She makes her own income.""She won't be allowed to make a penny. That is the glory of it,"Arnold said; seeming radiant, stirred and strange.His mother looked at him."You remind me of William,"she returned placidly."How odd men are when they——""Get their teeth into a particular woman! Yes, don't they worry?"He smiled into her dimples and her double chin."You like Commander Attfield?""Very much. I shall like him better when you are married and I know him more. At present you see——""That's just it,"his mother interrupted, her delightful blush rising to her fat cheeks."I wish other people didn't see.""Jane would see." Arnold could not get away from this agitating topic of Jane."She'd wring a short story out of you and him.""Horrid!"His mother appeared delicately disdainful."I can't think how those writing people can put their own feelings and other people's feelings into print: and take money for it and let all the world read.""They are not less sensitive than you; they are only more eloquent,"her son told her stiffly."Don't get your neck feathers up,"she stroked him just above his collar,"I won't attack your Jane. But you do all lead an odd life, Arnold: the typewriter always going and that lazy brother, surly and appealing; and you sticking at your easel; and Mrs. Welfare, with her impudent, good-natured tongue. I shall have some more old clothes for her soon."Arnold seemed to detach himself from Dulwich; to dissect and speculate."Sometimes I can't understand them,"he said. "The contrast between John-Andrew's silence and Jane's overflowing speech I find uncanny. You want to burst out of the room: get away from the two of them and breathe hard. As to Commander Attfield—you would rather talk about him, wouldn't you?—he is delightful. Good to look at; clean, healthy and well bred. He belongs, in appearance, to a rather uncommon type of middle-aged British gentleman. He is like a Dalmatian dog: one of them in every town. Middle age, with men, is a tricky time. I shall not look half so nice. I shall be parched and insignificant; bleached and browny-white. Let us continue the dog figure and say I shall be a mongrel Irish terrier!""Middle age! It is what you call a tricky time with women too. I have to take such a lot of trouble."His mother was plaintive."You take as much trouble as Jane—and with what a different result."Her son was admiring her. She looked pleased.Yes, I don't think I've ever degenerated into what is called a matron's style? And I have triumphed over increasing fat. But you've spent a lot of money on me.""I have, darling."He was frank."You have meant an expensive upkeep. A house with plenty of glass; with vineries and hot-beds—that expresses you, mother.""You've been so good."She sighed, petting him with those eloquent brown eyes."Have I? Commander Attfield will continue my treatment.""I shall persuade him,"his mother looked eager,"to take a country place. You can come down and paint. You can slack off a bit. You can devote yourself to those funny water-colours.""Are they so funny?"He looked at her attentively: he waited to hear what she would say. For she represented the ' public ' and if she could not understand his water-colours there might be hope for them in the best sense."Oh very. I like the black and white work best. When I go down to the Dulwich library—it isn't often, for I dislike the atmosphere of such places—it is very gratifying to find the work of my well-known son in every magazine I pick up. You are making lots of money, aren't you? If we take a country place, you mustn't bring Miss Vaguener.""Lots of money—so far; but it may stop. Any-thing to pay for this week?""Only one or two little extras. And one or two little odd jobs about the garden. I saved them for you because exercise is what you want. We will go out in the garden now. I'll show you the things that want nailing up. And then that man never mows the grass really properly."She arose, slipped her hand through his arm and looked down on him. She was taller than he was, just as Becca was taller than John-Andrew."You pay for dressing."He looked up at her."What is it about you that makes you always elegant? Just, now, sitting down—and so fat that you sit with your knees apart and so fat that you've got dear little bracelets of fat round your wrist like a baby—you looked a Roman Empress.""No I didn't. Nose isn't big enough. I dislike a big nose; always goes with stupid women.""Does it? That is one to Jane. Hers is a snub. If I can't bring her to your country place I shall be sulky, mother."They went through the little greenhouse into the garden."Don't marry your Jane," she implored."Must—if she'll let me."Arnold was solemn. He sounded uplifted.CHAPTER VITHAT week-end when Buttifant went to Dulwich to see his mother, meant the end of all things for John-Andrew and for Jane. The end was in sight and—in the way human drama has—neither suspected. Jane was at the beginning of a story more holding than any she had written; Vaguener was going to get what he wanted—and he would pay the price!When they woke upon that particular morning, it was to the usual thoughts and apprehensions, and the usual dull conviction that this routine would last for ever.Vaguener twisted frantically on his pillow at five, because Jane had started tapping in the next room. She had taken to rising very early and working hours before breakfast. She said that her illness had thrown her back with her work and that she must do this. There was, latterly, a mystery about Jane and her work but Vaguener had not noticed.He noticed and knew nothing but his own unbearable pain.For months he had been taking money of Jane—and nothing had happened! Yet he had sworn to himself that when it came to taking money from her something should and must happen. Desolately, he began to get what he called the hang of himself: he had the murderous desire for strength and achievement—of any sort. Yet, when it came to the point, he could not carry things through.He went regularly to the roll-top desk, taking Jane's small change. He bought tobacco and everything he wanted. She used to look at him and grin. She would look at him over the top of the typewriter, or up from a stack of MS., or up from the penny account books in which she made notes. She had a stack of those penny books and she chronicled—or believed that she chronicled—everything that mattered.He knew that Jane was speculating upon him, talking about him. He used to listen when she went into the kitchen to settle dinners and things with Mrs. Welfare. He never caught his name: oh but they talked—and they looked at each other! Neither of them believed in keeping a man. Had not Mrs. Welfare said so? He made no attempt to get another post nor did Jane urge him. Jane, of late, had been absorbed. She even looked vague while she ate and for many weeks she had not bought herself new fal-lals. He missed the latest novelty pinned on at her neck; and the latest novelty—in the pin-cushion or stuffed animal line—about the sitting-room.He listened to Jane and Mrs. Welfare—for women will talk when they get together in a kitchen! He also suspected Buttifant and sometimes in the evenings when they were all three together he would get up and say he must post a letter.Jane used to laugh in her metallic way and shout,"What letter?"Or she would say, with that insolent generosity of hers,"Help yourself to a stamp, old boy. You'll find them in an empty type-ribbon box. You know where my things are as well as I do."He would stand at the roll-top desk with his back to them; and he knew that Jane winked at Buttifant. He knew that Buttifant raised his silly faint eyebrows.He would go out into the Square. He would walk round the quietly cloistered place; round and round, looking up at the sitting-room window of Jane's set, wondering what she and Buttifant were saying. Sometimes as he prowled in this way along the pavements, in the sweet half-dusk of summer, curfew would ring; drawing him back to unseen things and forceful times. If he had lived in some other age he might have drawn blood. But nobody murdered in that way nowadays—except the lower classes. The better classes used poison—or something more subtle still.He pondered upon it, walking round and round. Six months ago he would have got excited and hopeful, he would have seen an essay in this topic of murder; something he would write off, white-hot, and then tear to pieces next day with a destructive classicism. The day after, he would have taken it to Mr. Branch; he had done this sort of thing lots of times. The agent's reception had always been the same. His glance and his smile had been the same, his gesture with his fat hands was the same, his words were the same. He used to say,"My dear fellow, there is no market. Your stuff is very good very likely—but what do they care for literature? They want something to hold their readers, something to send their circulation up. Can't you turn me off stuff like that? I could handle it."He referred to the editors for whom Jane wrote.Vaguener, then, would walk round South Square on those June nights about curfew time. He looked at one window—yet he felt that people at other windows were looking at him; were laughing and jeering and speculating. They knew that he lived upon his sister; took her small change, ate her food, let her pay for having his shirts and collars washed. Trust Mrs. Welfare—who worked in half a dozen sets—for spreading that yarn!In the end, he would bolt upstairs, enter the set stealthily and burst into the sitting-room without giving them warning. He burst in as a jealous husband might burst. He would find Buttifant and Jane sitting in that telling silence which falls between people when they love—and before confession: the eloquent, wonderful waiting time—of which he knew nothing, nor did Jane. Buttifant made the atmosphere. He would be sitting extra quiet, extra white, with perhaps a touch of red on his face: he would be looking at Jane.But it was all going to end and the day had dawned! Yet when Jane woke and dressed in a hurry and clanked the cover off her typewriter (for she never could be quiet) she had no suspicion that this day would be unlike all the other ones. When Vaguener awoke, cursed her wretchedly for making such a row, then fell asleep again, he did not know. At nine he woke afresh and got up; merely wondering how he would get through the day.And there were all the days to follow! He had come to that state: he foresaw years and years of living upon Jane, of listening to her typewriter, of going to her roll-top desk. She had even spoken of drawing a cheque for his new suit. She said he was in rags and a positive disgrace. She added with her hearty amiability that it was only fair that, if she paid, she should choose the cloth. He must write for patterns? Or should she?She had written yesterday. He did nothing but dress himself and eat his dinner and do marketing for Jane. Since she had been so busy she had allowed him to do that and was grateful.He used to go down Fetter Lane or Lamb's Conduit Street with a basket. He brought everything home, even the potatoes; for Jane said it was much more handy to housekeep that way. He found out that in Red Lion Street you got butter a halfpenny a pound cheaper than anywhere else.When he returned, Jane would be tapping madly and he would give the basket of food to Mrs. Welfare. The way that woman used to turn round from the greasy sink and stare! The insults that her sharp eye and her silent mouth heaped upon him!He grew to be skilful at a bargain. He knew which day the butcher sold New Zealand kidneys and at which shop you saved on bananas. He became an expert in cooking eggs. Once he found himself talking solemnly to Jane about bacon—and she laughed in his face!Plenty of pain in that laugh; plenty of hurt and scorn—but he was not the one to hear.The day had dawned; the June Monday that was bringing Buttifant back from Dulwich. Everything was settled. He had met Commander Attfield on the Sunday, talked with him at length, liked him enor-mously. The Commander had insisted not only upon marrying his mother but on taking his two little brothers completely off his hands. He said that he had more money than he could do with; it was uncomfortable.So Arnold, on his way back to Gray's Inn, decided that he would propose to Jane that night. He would propose. She would refuse. She would go on refusing. But he would go on proposing.Never had the world been more lovely than it was to Buttifant that day as he travelled back from the suburbs. He saw such divine things; such tints and shapes. He wanted his water-colours.Jane and Vaguener had breakfasted as usual; she a little strained, he a little solemn; but nothing more. Then she settled to work and he went off to buy a wild rabbit and some of those big onions to make the sauce."Be sure it's wild," said Jane and she sat down to the typewriter." There isn't a bit of taste in Ostends."He gave the rabbit to Mrs. Welfare."Who's going to skin it, that's what I want to know?" she asked loudly. The typewriter in the sitting-room ceased, then it tore on."I know who isn't," he returned mildly.He went into his bedroom to read the morning paper."Mr. Welfare," said Jane's charwoman, speaking shrilly into his back, as he receded,"would no more let me skin a rabbit than he'd let me go down a drain. Man's work I call it.""Woman's work, my good soul." Vaguener held his bedroom door in his hand before he softly shut it."Man kills the animal, woman cleans it. You've only got to imagine wild rabbits scuttling down Lamb's Conduit Street. Rabbits burrowing under the tram lines in Theobald's Road, Mrs. Welfare.""Rabbits in Tibbald's Row! I never!" said Mrs. Welfare. Vaguener had chuckled in what she called his "nasty way." He had shut his door.He went for a walk in the afternoon leaving Jane working. The rabbit they had for dinner was excellent. It put them both into a human temper. Jane said before he went:"Come back to tea early, Johnny. I've got a treat. Shall we make it half-past three?""If you like. But if we waited till five Buttifant might come in.""He'll be late home from Dulwich," said Jane. "He told me so. I shall be ready at half-past three, so you turn up. And for goodness' sake, Johnny, go down New Oxford Street and buy a new hat. That bowler's a disgrace. Yet you only had a new one a little while back.""It's a long while back. I can't get one to-day; there's no more money in your desk.""Have you taken my last shilling? Oh bother you, John-Andrew! I may want a shilling for the gas. But I can't draw a cheque now. Do go away. Let me finish."She sounded frantic."You are working too hard, Jane.""Somebody's got to work."She was tapping away, as she made this retort.He went out, walking absently, looking with mechanical dulled agony along the vista of the years that would be: he doing nothing, Jane doing it all.Yet already, the life of the two was over—so far as living together went. He depraved, yet fine, she coarse, but moral—their relation, save in the loose physical sense, was over.Things were changed, the past had gone, the terrific future beat at the door. They did not know. We are only made aware of what may be called official drama. We know when we are sentenced in a court of justice. We have been prepared for, at least,#x2014;something. But the more subtle sentence comes swinging round the corner, in the midst of our fun or our misery.So John-Andrew walked away in the delightful sun and Jane tapped in a final fervour—for she was finishing—and Buttifant came riotously from Dulwich. He was going to marry Jane.John-Andrew got home at three. He brought some chocolate cream."Your money—but I hope it doesn't spoil the gift," he said quaintly, taking it to Jane as she sat, thoughtful, by the window. Odd to find Jane thoughtful! She took the paper bag."Is it pink inside?" she asked. "I like the pink best."She bit it, then broke off a section and gave it to her brother. They looked at each other. Feeling was so strong that, in each case there was a quickened heart beat. For months they had been living at high pressure.Jane moved from the window and drew him away from it. She put her arms, such lumpy soft arms (Vaguener noticed this) round his neck."You are a dear gentle thoughtful old soul, John-Andrew."She looked at him affectionately. Then she went off and she fetched the tea-tray, which Mrs. Welfare left ready set out in the kitchen."Cream!" said Jane on a high note, returning and slamming the tray down, "and a pot of that jolly paste from the shop near Leicester Square. And cake. We'll have a good gorge and afterwards I want to tell you something. I'm always hungry, because I work so hard.""Tell me something! What?""Never mind. You wait."She trembled like a flabby jelly, so he thought.They ate heartily at tea. Very often it seemed as if, without agreement but with a common motive, they sought to console themselves by eating: she for her hard work, he for his agonising idleness."Help me take the things out," said Jane, when they had finished. "Don't take the paste, John-Andrew, or that woman will eat the lot. Put it in the cupboard here."Her cheeks were flushed and as she packed the china together she broke a saucer."Your skin's patchy. You look like Buttifant," Vaguener said."Oh bother Mr. Buttifant! I'm so glad he's at Dulwich. I don't want him to-night. Let's sport the oak, in case he came back early. I've got something to say and it would drive me mad to be interrupted."When they had cleared away the tea-things, she went and shut the outer door. When she returned to the sitting-room she shut the window, looking peevish."Let's be quiet," she said, dropping into her chair."Can't be quiet; you want to talk."Jane laughed."I know I've got a clear voice—but you needn't rub it in.""Sit down," she pointed to the chair where he usually sat, "and I'll tell you something. I'll read you something.""Read! Is that it?"John-Andrew looked evil. What did he care for her rubbishy stories?Jane was at the roll-top desk. She brought back a MS."This is my play," she said solemnly. "That is why I got up in the morning early. It's why I'm so dreadfully tired and so strained that if you only look at me I feel like crying.""Do you feel like that?""Yes I do; but I don't expect a man to understand. This is my good work, John-Andrew. You've got to listen and tell me what you think.""Wait a bit. What put the idea of a play into your head?""I don't know." Jane sounded strange. "It was when I was in bed with that bad cold. I got the idea the day that Mr. Buttifant brought the picture of gulls and a violet ground. Poor dear! He has no sense of colour. I'm always telling him so. I rub it in."She sat with the typewritten play on her knee; her eyes, glassy and bright, stared at the wall."And Becca was here and you took some stuff of mine to Branch. Do you remember?"Vaguener nodded. He remembered. Mr. Branch had been peculiarly insulting that day."And Becca who is always mad," Jane said, "was—more than usual! We are all mad, in our way, John-Andrew; we Vagueners.""No, Kenneth's sane enough.""I suppose he is—the chip!" Jane was scornful."If by chip, you mean celibate; we are—you and I.""Rather!" she was hearty. "I wouldn't be bothered with getting married. What an awful fag!""What was Becca mad about?"John-Andrew was smoking. He had made an enormous tea and Jane wasn't typing. So he sounded and looked amiable. He hoped that, by conversation, he might draw her away from that tiresome idea of reading her stupid play aloud. Buttifant might come back, she could read it to him. But she had closed the oak against Buttifant! They were shut in here together, he and Jane. Anything might happen. It was extraordinary to reflect upon the staggering privacy of these sets of chambers in the Inns of Court."Mad about you." Jane was blunt. "In love with you. I told her it was no good; that you hadn't a penny.""I hope you added that I hadn't a passion.""Don't be indelicate," Jane wriggled. "She was bad enough. I made notes of all she said about love and marriage and that kind of thing."Jane jerked in her speech. John-Andrew's face, behind the tobacco smoke, looked clammy."She said that most women were like monkeys and would marry any man so long as they got a clean cage and enough cocoanuts. No, she didn't." Jane's gaze at the wall became more fixed. "I've said that myself, in my play. Becca started me, Johnny. After she went, I lay in bed burning all over and I made notes like mad. I filled up one book and got out of bed to fetch another. The very next morning I started on my play. I've called it Cackle Street.""Cackle Street! That's no good as a title.""What do you know about titles? It's very good—and I've got Becca to thank for it. She said that the life of writing people was like living in a place called Cackle Street. All of us laying eggs and seeing who could make the most row and Branch coming round with a basket.""Mr. Branch coming round with a basket!" Vaguener laughed out, violently."Oh don't make such a din, John-Andrew." Jane jumped. " That girl depressed me horribly and I thought that the day might come when Branch would——""Take away your nest box? Exactly."He was looking at the MS. upon her knee. Of course it wasn't good. It was the usual piffle: Jane's piffle which sold so well. She was talking about that."I'm booked up for the end of the year, but suppose I—stopped! Suppose Branch said—and he hinted at it the other day—that my stuff hadn't got enough snap. We are all 'bus horses to him; we only last a certain time.""There's money to be made while you're between the shafts. Look at young Best.""I don't count him." Jane was contemptuous. "He won't last long; and he is spending his money like water, the young ass."Supposing," her voice kept getting shriller, "I do save enough to bring in two pounds a week. What's that?""Exactly—for two of us!" Vaguener was sardonic."Oh, Johnny!" she smiled at him in an odd way. "And I must have nice things," she proceeded.Her voice was just as usual—unbearable. But it would have broken Buttifant's heart; he would have detected."I can't let myself go as Mrs. Buttifant does. I must dress."She started stroking her MS., she was suddenly silent. This was so amazing that Vaguener felt respect for Jane and understanding. When she spoke again, it was upon a shadowed note."So I did this—as a last throw. It is my good work, Johnny. It must be good, because it came without any trouble and because I had to do it.""I used to feel that when first I came to Gray's Inn and before Mr. Branch knocked all heart out of me. Yet you say my work's no good.""Your work!" Jane was scornful at once; she was narrow and fierce and bitter."You must listen to this." She held her papers tight, she subdued herself. "You must tell me what
you think. If it isn't any good, if Branch won't touch it, I shall——"She stopped."You shall—what?""Kill myself. I'm sick of it all. Suicide! That's it.""Jane!"She grinned queerly in his dark violent little face. They looked a savage, ill-assorted pair."You think I haven't got it in me, but I have. Don't let's be silly." She opened her play. "Let me read you this. It's popular—and yet I feel it is good. I want it to be a money success but an artistic one too. I don't want it produced at a minor theatre: good notices, a short run and five pounds profit."She laughed in her usual hearty way; she had recovered."Let's have it," said John-Andrew.He settled resignedly in the chair; he'd got to have it. Jane began to read.After a bit he said quietly:"Do you mind if I go and stand by the window? I can hear just as well."For she must not see his face."Anywhere you like," snapped Jane, breaking off, then flowing on.He went and stared out of the window. He knew that this half-hour or so through which Jane read him Crackle Street was a time that he would not only never forget but that he would never be void of: the effect of it, he would absorb. These haunting memories! These pallid ghosts of the mind! You could not buy or beg them off, nor could you pray them away. Prayer! It had meant a great deal to him once. He stood by the window, rigid yet trembling. He stared out and his hungry heart made a noise within him.Jane went on reading Cackle Street; and how good it was; how—non-Janey! Vaguener found himself face to face with a position which he would not and could not bear. Jane had done the trick, she had got there. Jane was a genius.Jane's voice went on behind him. The common quality of her voice! Not only to-day but always he hated her.She was so ugly; he turned furtively round. Any Frenchwoman would have made a marketable commodity of such positive ugliness. Jane did nothing to enthrall or control any man. She was conceited, yet she cared for nothing but her work. She was an ugly river carrying useful merchandise. So far, he had regarded her merely as that. She was proving herself as something more.He hated her big fair face and dull hair. He hated the shape of her head; it was round, like a ball.There she sat in the deep chair; reading away—and such transcendently clever stuff! She was provoking him dangerously yet had she seen his face she would have suspected nothing. She was too big a fool. A fool! But she had written Cackle Street!He drummed his long, strong fingers on the window."For goodness' sake don't," screamed Jane.She dropped her voice and went on reading. When she got to the end of the second act she said,"I'll go on to the end. Don't speak. Tell me what you think afterwards.""Here's Buttifant coming across the Square with a rose in his coat," Vaguener told her, after a bit."Johnny, come away from the window. I won't be interrupted."Her voice had an edge.Vaguener stepped back. They listened. They heard Buttifant thump at the oak. This he did two or three times, then he went into his own set.Jane continued to read, John-Andrew returned to the window. At last the play was finished. He heard her say,"Do you like it? Is it good?""Very good," he answered. "Supreme," and he meant this with all his soul.He went to where she sat. Jane looked at him. Then her eyes filled, she put out her arms helplessly, turned her head upon her shoulder and burst out crying."Give me a cigarette," she blubbered."Those Turkish ones that Mr. Buttifant gives you. They pull me together."He brought out his cigarette case. Jane blew her nose, wiped her eyes and took one. "Light it," she said forlornly.He lighted it and she fell back."If you knew all I've gone through," she said."There is money in a play if you can do it. Say Cackle Street catches on, I'm safe. The plot just fell into shape, Johnny, that day Becca was here and when Mr. Buttifant brought the honey. The words tumbled over each other. The people stood round my bed.""The people?""In Cackle Street, stupid."She smiled at him. He regarded her forlorn red nose and swelled eyes. He wished she wouldn't smoke, for she had none of the qualities suitable to a woman smoking.' Throw that thing away," he said."I don't like the idea of a woman smoking either, but it soothes me now and then. Let me finish," she returned."Have you told Buttifant, Jane? Have you told Mr. Branch?""I haven't told a soul. I only finished it this afternoon.""That's a good thing.""Why is it a good thing?""I don't know."He giggled."How silly you are, Johnny! Can't you say anything more about Cackle Street.""I have said. It is supreme. What more do you want? Let me think about it."They sat quiet, Jane's cigarette rapidly getting to a stump. She smoked fast.Yet not so fast as Vaguener thought; and not so swift as his decision. She had dealt a death blow. She had unfolded ideas that were magnificent. If Cackle Street were produced (and he knew that Mr. Branch would jump at it) and if it were simply popular he could bear that, perhaps. He might endure it if Jane made pots of money and was derided by serious writers. What he could not and would not suffer was to see her take her place in the front row. He was hanged if he would!Hanged!If you murdered a person you got hanged as a rule. He lighted another cigarette, he held out the case to Jane. She threw her stump away, took another, and lighted it herself."Two won't hurt me just for once in a way," she said hazily, looking happy.After a long while she added:"Do talk.""Can't. I'm thinking.""About Cackle Street?""Confound you, Jane! Yes.""You seem to think so much of it." She threw away her second cigarette." I don't know what to think. I'm all up or down. One day it is wonderful, the next day it is rot. I may burn it. I may never show it to Branch. That's how I feel.""Don't burn it," said Vaguener slowly."But if it's no good," she was noisy and passionate,"I shall chuck it.""Chuck what?""Everything." Jane looked at him and her blue eyes were lurid—she was saying something with those eyes at last. "You think I can't. Can't I? If this play is rot—and it may be—I won't go on; just making money and getting nothing else, while cads like Gabriel Best are called geniuses.""He is a little bounder, that young Best," said Vaguener."For goodness' sake, don't bother about him." Jane was snappish."Johnny, you go for a walk and let me read this thing through to myself. I can't rest until I do.""All right." He bounded up. "But don't burn it, Jane."He looked at the empty fire-grate and so did she."Give me an hour, just to read it through and see What I make of it," she pleaded.He nodded and went into his bedroom for his hat and stick. He left her looking blankly down at the MS. Tears were on her cheeks. Jane was worn out. He did not care; no—not a hang!He went stealthily out. Jane's last words had been " Be sure you sport the oak. I don't want to be bothered by Mr. Buttifant."He went walking north towards King's Cross. He continued on towards Hampstead Road, looking at nothing in particular. He was so hot that the soles of his feet felt burning as they touched the pavements. So he walked like a cat.He stood looking over the railings at the monumental mason's yard; where the crosses, obelisks and simpering lady angels are. When he walked on it was with a Kensal Green tinge of mind and before him bobbed the sharp black lettering upon new gravestones. All the letters spelled one name; this was strange and most monotonous. He had walked on, then he stopped; taking an envelope and pencil from his pocket he wrote in capitals JANE VAGUENER. It looked well. He had written her name carefully. More carefully he tore the envelope into scraps and dropped them, one by one, as he walked.The summer dust and the summer traffic got upon his nerves and he slanted off into one of those decorous stucco Crescents that are always cool. How long he walked in this cool land he did not know but the little moon came out. The restrained houses, palely yellow, the gentle silver heavens helped him to arrange his thoughts. They walked in a well-ordered procession; they did not tumble helter-skelter over each other, as they did when he wrote things to take to Mr. Branch.Yet he was in a confused agony of mind, for he knew now how hopeless he was of attainment. Literature had failed him as Religion had failed; as everything had failed. That was his doom. Yet that Jane should excel him was not to be thought of. But as to murdering her!What was murder? It meant that you cleared the way as you went along: and this was incumbent upon every man. Murder sometimes meant only this and it might, so, become commendable.It was late when he got back to South Square.Jane would have made the evening cups of chocolate. She would have given some to Buttifant—they were sitting in there talking about him. Jane would shout at him for coming in late, she would grumble goodnaturedly while she made his chocolate. She was a good sort—his face was gentle and affectionate for a moment; it was his going-to-market face. Yes, a good sort! But as to letting her live! As to letting her swagger about London as the author of Cackle Street, he would be hanged if he would. Yes. Hanged—if he would!When he let himself into the set he found it empty. Across the landing, he had noticed that Buttifant's oak was sported. The sitting-room was dim, so he lighted a candle. He wished, although it was June, that he could light a fire also. He shivered so.A note from Jane addressed to him was upon the roll-top desk. For one absurd moment he had an idea that she had eloped with Buttifant. He was full of imaginative hope concerning Jane and he did not care what became of her so long as she got out of the way: that is, so long as Cackle Street was never produced. He looked at the empty grate, half hoping to see the tinder of Cackle Street lying in it. She had threatened to burn it. Nothing in the grate! So he opened her note. Jane said,"I've had a wire from Branch who wants me to dine with him. I've got on your violet silk, old boy; there was nobody to hook me up. Branch is always dangerous when he's most chummy; so if this means bad luck I shall finish off, for I'm sick to death. I said so to you at tea time; and the word suicide made you jump, didn't it, dear old chap? I read that MS. over after you went out and it's bad. I have never written worse stuff. Don't sit up. If you go out, for Heaven's sake come in quietly: it's touch and go with me to-night.Jane"P.S.—I am sick to death, Johnny—sick."She had said that twice; sick to death!Vaguener stood there, thoughtful.She had lost confidence in Cackle Street, but that merely proved her to be a genius: for they are always up or down! What mysteries people were, even common people like Jane. Yet—devil take her—he must not call her common any more; for she had written Cackle Street.Where had she put it? He rummaged in the rolltop desk. He found two sets of MS. There was Cackle Street and there was the thing she was doing to order for Mr. Branch. With Cackle Street in one hand, with Jane's note in the other, he sat down by the desk, prepared to read by the light of the candle. As to Jane's letter, it was a weapon. Yes, she had put the weapon in his hands.He started reading. His head cleared and cooled now that he dealt with composition—and it was impossible to deny the genius of this affair. Jane had done the trick. She was a genius! Common, ugh', noisy Jane; with her awful clothes and her cheap industry!He loved her austerity, limpidity and beautiful order as displayed in Cackle Street. He could appreciate fine work yet he could not produce it. He recognised this. All that he had done, how weak it was. Mr. Branch would have been a fool had he tried to handle it. Jane's play was broad and strong; simple and masterly. It showed ultimate finish and perfect fineness, yet it made an appeal to the heart. It was a thing to make common people—people just like Jane—laugh and cry. Yet it would provoke the homage of the gifted ones. They might be jealous but they could not ignore.Cackle Street would not leave the common people cold; for it dealt with a topic that they could understand and dealt with it simply. Vaguener beheld the amazing simplicity of genius—and it was Jane!She had been doing this in the early mornings while he slept. She had been doing it while he bought wild rabbits for Mrs. Welfare to skin.He put down the MS., held his hands over his face and cried. He had not known till now how bitter it had been to live upon the earnings of a woman.Jane would have fame, fortune and at once. Cackle Street would have a long run, it would be taken to America, go round the provinces, be translated into other languages. He racked himself with all the possibilities. It would be filmed: it was good enough to stand the test of that. Everybody would applaud it and be swayed. Not a single critic would dare to sneer—nor would he wish to!And all this wonderful stuff had come out of Jane!He wiped his face. He reflected. He supposed it was the odd Vaguener blood: the Trewhella blood! They had got it from their grandfather, this blessing and this curse; the desire for expression, the ability, or the non-ability to express. Jane had got there. He never would. Becca would get there. No, she would not; for all that Becca wanted was to marry him. He flushed: sitting alone, he retreated and seemed ashamed. He remembered looks that he had seen upon Becca's face and things that her eyes had said.Never mind Becca! Cackle Street was the only thing that mattered. He picked it up, he went on reading. Sometimes he stopped, looked round the room and said incredulously, "Jane!—Yes, that large shoddy sister of his—she had done it. Jane, dining out with Mr. Branch, wearing her violet silk, shouting and sniggering; eminently pleased with herself!"He finished the play and he stood up; looking collected and official. He put Cackle Street tidily back into the pigeon-hole beside the cheap serial that was designed for virtuous family reading. Was it possible that one brain could think out two such different things?He stood in the middle of the room. He was transformed; this was not the man who had flaccidly lived upon Jane for more than six months. This was a man of affairs; concentrated, brisk, cautious. He felt immensely better: for he had made up his mind. He was going to do something definite at last. To-night he would murder Jane.The dim garment of his boredom dropped off and, emotionally, he became a well-groomed man.Everything was settled; the smallest details were arranged; and so easy. This made him think that, subconsciously, he must have decided to murder Jane months back. His brain had been doing its work. He had only been waiting for Jane to hand the weapon.He put her note in his pocket, then he scribbled a note to her, taking a half-sheet of paper from his pocket book. On one side of it were pencillings, ideas that he had jotted down for a sonnet. He scratched them out ruthlessly; he would not want them. He had come to simpleness. He was going to do something manly, definite and strong.And if he got hanged for it? If he got hanged for it—how Mrs. Welfare would talk! The things that she would say to Mr. Welfare in the evenings. He wrote to Jane on the clean side of the paper."Got your note. Don't be a duffer. Have gone out with Buttifant and if I am late back will get him to give me a shake down. See you in the morning."Johnny".He had slept at Buttifant's before, so Jane would be neither surprised nor alarmed. And she would be so pleased at his signing "Johnny." She loved him to be affectionate. That "Johnny " would cheer her up. She would go to bed and sleep soundly.He left the set, slamming the oak. He stood upon the landing. His dark face was brutal, it was primal. He might have been a savage on a lonely hill.He stood there and he remembered how he had sat in his bedroom trying to work all the winter, morning after morning, while Jane tapped through the wall; and how he had envied navvies or porters or draymen: those elemental muscular creatures who never troubled themselves about the light and the shade of life, nor the complexity of human relationships. They would have laughed or sworn had you tried to explain.Men of this sort committed murder if the moment came. You read about it in the papers. They cut the throat of the woman they loved. They did this and they took their punishment: they, as they put it, swung for her. They were brutal and so was the law. He would perhaps swing for Jane. But he would give himself a sporting chance of escape. He did not mean to be found out if he could help it. The whole thing was at his fingers' ends. He looked at his fingers.Really, the thing was astonishingly easy.He tapped at Buttifant's door and Buttifant opened. He looked beyond Vaguener and said, sounding odd,"Where's your sister?""She's dining out with Mr. Branch." Vaguener seemed irradiated. "May I come in?""Of course. Do."They went into the studio. Buttifant had been working; he looked pinched.He walked back to his easel, then he turned round."Why did you two sport your oak this afternoon? Why didn't you let me in? I saw you at the window. I'd brought some flowers and I wanted some tea."He was doleful."It was unfriendly," John-Andrew spoke as if he'd got every word off pat, "but you know what Jane is over her work. She had finished some stuff and she wanted my opinion. She was reading aloud.""And now she's gone out; so I shan't see her to-night.""You shall see her to-morrow. To-night you must put up with me, Buttifant. Can't we go out? A theatre or something. You pay—and I'll pay you later on. Can you put me up if we get in late? Jane's nervy since she had that cold in the spring. The least thing wakes her and then she takes a sleeping powder.""She ought not to take those things? Why don't you stop her?"Buttifant left his easel; he was fierce."I! Stop Jane! My dear fellow! And there is no harm in those powders; she gave me two when I had toothache. I took one: the other is in my pocket.""I can put you up." Buttifant hated him for looking so happy. There was very little venom in Buttifant; but what there was Vaguener provoked. How dare he work Jane to death and, throughout, gibe at her? How dare he look so jaunty to-night?"I've got the folding bedstead that I keep for Reggie or Bernie in the holidays. I give them a treat one at a time. You can have that."Buttifant's face cleared when he referred to his little brothers. Commander Attfield had made him-self responsible for them henceforth. So Buttifant free to marry Jane. Yet, upon this joyful day of decision Jane had sported her oak, she was dining out with Branch."Oh thanks!" He had never known Vaguener so blithe. "Shall we go, then? What is there on? What do you advise? I feel like a good play.""Thought you hated the theatre."Buttifant, as he said this, was unpacking a cardboard box filled with flowers and putting them in water, which he fetched from his tiny kitchen."I couldn't bring them in a bunch," he said shamefacedly and very like blushing. "It looks so rustic! They will be fresh to-morrow.""And won't Jane shout when she sees them," said John-Andrew gaily.Buttifant, the flowers disposed of, sat down."Well, aren't you coming?"Vaguener was eager to be off."I suppose so." The little white artist stood up. "It will do me good. I've got the hump to-night. I feel, so Mrs. Welfare would say, as if someone walks over my grave. I was thinking before you came in, of what would happen if I fell ill; if the doctor ordered a serious operation. All my work would stop.""Operations only happen to people who can afford them," Vaguener told him, adding grimly: "If it happened to you, you'd die under the knife and be spared the expense of a long convalescence.""I wish," Buttifant walked to his easel and then walked away from it, "that I had been apprenticed to a decent trade; no, an outdoor muscular affair; something where you only had to make your mark. No drawing, no writing. Sick to death of it."Vaguener jumped. He was quiet for a second, then nodding he said,"Sick to death are you? I know. You'd like to be a brewer's drayman, or a railway porter, something strong: pick up Continental luggage as if it were a handful of feathers!"He shouted: and his shout had a note of Jane!"If I told him that he'd knock me down," thought Buttifant weirdly. "He looks reckless. What's happened to him?""I wish your sister could have come with you or that I could have come to her for chocolate," he said childishly. "She is so cheerful, so chronically jolly—if only she'll keep off her investments. I wanted her to-night."His voice nickered and so did his face; white, small and tense."Jane has her moments of positive despair. You don't know Jane," remarked Vaguener emphatically. "I am anxious about her, for you are never sure of these commonplace people; they wear a mask."Buttifant looked at him intolerantly."Your sister is the frankest creature upon earth. Nothing troubles her. She works those serials as a cook works dough.""Nevertheless, she is afraid the present batch won't rise. She is worried about it and that is why she read it to me this afternoon.""Good?" Buttifant lifted his brows."The usual stuff." Vaguener was insolent. "Jane says the things that the mob, her public, has already said and would like to hear said again."He moved to the door."Let's go," he said."All right." Buttifant got his hat."You won't mind," he remarked as they went downstairs, "if we make up the chair bedstead in my room? The studio's in an awful mess?""I could sleep in the kitchen." Vaguener was quick."With your head in the sink? It's only a cupboard, and what would Mrs. Welfare say in the morning?""I'd forgotten her. No I don't want to see her. Why not the studio?""No." Buttifant was curt. His studio—water-colours hanging there—was to him absurdly and seriously sacred. "My bedroom, if you don't mind. It's a nice big room. We can crowd into opposite corners.""All right, but you make it difficult." Vaguener was sullen."Difficult?""I shall be a nuisance in your room. Why should you put up with me? I'd better go across the landing and spoil Jane's night.""Nonsense. I don't mind you in my room. Shan't know you're there. I sleep like a log."They crossed the Square, went down the passage through the gate and into Holborn.John-Andrew said, smiling and with the ugly temper out of his voice,"All right. Your room; perhaps that's best."They went to a theatre, to see a play which, so Buttifant said, Commander Attfield recommended. 
He had told Vaguener about the Commander: Vaguener was plainly bored, for love and marriage always bored him. Sensitively he implied, and as sensitively Buttifant gathered, that Mrs. Buttifant had fallen in his estimation. At Jane's tea-party he had concluded her to be sympathetic and delicate: now she was neither. She was making a second marriage."What do you think of it?" asked Buttifant of the play when they left the theatre."Nothing at all. I could write a better one myself.""You write a better one! Oh come, Vaguener!"The impudent amusement sounded in Buttifant "s voice, just as it sounded so often in Jane's.Vaguener blazed."Yes, I could," he said resolutely. "Some day I will. Some day I will surprise you."He boisterously took Buttifant's arm."Don't let's go back yet. Let's get something to eat. You pay; I'll pay you back."Buttifant regarded him. It had come to this: John-Andrew did not care whom he sponged on! He didn't grudge the money—but there was Jane!"Very well," he said quietly and he took him to a place. Vaguener knew nothing of London; all he knew was walking with empty pockets about the streets—that and a market basket and Jane's marketing purse, fat with small change!At the restaurant they found, amongst other men that Buttifant knew, Gabriel Best and Branch. Vaguener went pointedly up to the agent."Did you see my sister home?" he asked. "She dined with you, didn't she?""Yes, and I saw her home. She didn't seem herself to-night. She was depressed and that is very unlike her," said Branch.Buttifant was listening; Vaguener noticed that."She is working too hard, she ought to switch off for six months at least. She ought to go abroad and get fresh ideas. I told her so,"Branch added.He looked fat and shiny and seraphically calm, yet there was that heartless note in his voice which Jane dreaded. Young Best standing by and listening with interest put it into words,"If any of us were drowning, Branch, you wouldn't take off your coat till you were sure of your commission.""Very likely not." Branch was unperturbed. He continued talking to Vaguener; fixing him with a scornful pale eye."I told her that you can't get the foreign flavour of a place just by reading descriptive articles. She is writing about Madrid and she knows no more about it than I do about Patagonia. She tells me she has never been across the Channel. Says she can't afford it.""She has many claims on her purse." John-Andrew, saying this, looked diabolical."More's the pity."Branch was frigid. "I was obliged to tell her to-night that this stuff she's doing doesn't ring true. The market is changing and she must change. I hope she isn't played out, for your sake."He lifted his glass, looking at Vaguener over the top.Vaguener kept quiet."Played out! Of course she isn't." Buttifant was valiant at once. Vaguener said,"I am not happy about my sister, Mr. Branch. I think her work tells upon her more than we suppose."He spoke carefully and without feeling; he bore Mr. Branch no malice.Buttifant, Best and Branch looked at him contemptuously. Then they had a last drink and parted company. Best, who was a rich young man so far, had chambers on the Embankment, Branch was married and had to catch the train for Surbiton. Buttifant and Vaguener returned to Gray's Inn. They rang at the gate and were admitted. Vaguener politely said good night to the porter. He was amazingly bland, and he looked the man full in the eye.Buttifant was sleepy. He stumbled on the stairs and fumbled with his key. Vaguener held his arm."We mustn't wake Jane," he whispered. And he opened the door of the set himself.Directly he was in bed, Buttifant fell asleep, not dreaming, not moving; a soundless, motionless, deep slumber. He was right off. Vaguener, on the folding bed in the far corner, leaned upon his elbow sharply watching. Presently he slipped out. He stood in the moonlight; a little lithe man dressed in Buttifant's Pyjamas.He went out of the room and out of Buttifant's set. He stood upon the landing between the two sets and he glowered at Jane's oak with her name painted white upon it. Only her name!He felt calm and ultra-composed, he felt perfectly safe: he was convinced there would be no hitch.He was a simple, unscrupulous man going across the landing from one set of chambers to another to do a definite task. He had found work to do and it was violent. Violence was the thing which, always, he had demanded. He was not unduly elated, he had not a touch of conscience and, most emphatically, he was not afraid.When he had unlocked the two doors and stood in Jane's set his wrists trembled. Oh he must get the thing over, he must not lose his nerve!He went stolidly into the kitchen—the bare small place so redolent of Mrs. Welfare. There was a box upon the table full of knives. He took one out and went on to Jane's bedroom with it.He opened her door and stood still. There were her clothes neatly folded upon the chair, there was the shape of her body lying in the bed. He breathed quietly, drawing in the smell of soap, perfume and hair wash. Jane always made a careful toilette before she went to bed.He went up to the bed, the knife gripped fast. He was perfectly ready. As to flinching—not he! He was strong at last. He was going to murder Jane.He stood by the bed, moonlight was in the room and it fell melodramatically on the blade of the knife. It fell also upon Jane. She was lying on her side, facing him. The night was hot and the bedclothes were down to her waist. She lay in her nightgown, with her short, fat neck bare.Her hair in front was twisted into curlers, leaving her healthy face looking bigger than ever.She was lying on her side and she was broad awake. She saw him standing by the bed and saw the up-raised knife. Their eyes met and they kept perfectly still, just staring at each other; a glance of stupendous eloquence. Jane did not say a word. If she had spoken John-Andrew would have plunged the knife. She knew this.She looked at him: her eyes told and taught him all sorts of things. He would never forget that look in her hard blue eyes. Eyes that never talked: yet now they said more than her tongue had ever said. They said perhaps more than eyes ever had said: for this was a great occasion.John-Andrew turned away. The knife dropped to the floor. He stooped, picked it up and walked quietly out of the room. He replaced that knife in the box upon the kitchen table, then he went out of Jane's set, carefully closing both doors. He crossed the landing to Buttifant's.He was in a bath of blazing sweat, his throat was on fire. He said to himself, grimly,"It didn't come off!"Nothing he wanted to do ever did come off. It was a ticklish moment when he entered Buttifant's bedroom. But his friend lay fast asleep upon his back. There was a puckered smile upon the kind little white face. He didn't look pretty when he was in bed and asleep. Very few people did, reflected Vaguener, slipping between his own sheets that, still, were warm. Yet didn't they look worse when they were awake? He wanted to laugh.With a confused sense of something done, yet nonaccomplished, he fell asleep.It seemed but a moment later when Buttifant seized his shoulder, shouting out,"We've overslept. It is past ten. I've never done such a thing in my life before."Vaguener lopped round in his narrow bed, he blinked."I've had an awfully good night," he said cheerfully."Have you? More than I can say." Buttifant looked weary and not over-well. "There was something funny about that whisky last night, though it doesn't seem to have upset you. I slept like a log and woke in a fever. I might have been drugged."He turned away."Get up," he said. "Mother Welfare's been in and cooked the breakfast. She's left it in the oven."CHAPTER VIIBUTTIFANT went out. In the passage he ran up against Mrs. Welfare. It was a narrow passage. She was excited, Buttifant was dull. The two bumped against each other."What's up, Mrs. Welfare?" Buttifant appeared to slide out from a cloud. "You can't clear away yet for we haven't started breakfast. Overslept.""We! Then have you got them in here with you, Mr. Buttifant? I can't make nobody hear. I've been thumping at the oak till my knuckles are raw and Miss Vaguener ain't took in the milk. Oh I am glad she's here." Mrs. Welfare panted. "I didn't know what to think to tell you the truth. I was quite upset, for things do happen."She dropped her voice and looked towards the door of the studio. "I couldn't let myself in for he's got my key. Nothing ain't been the same since hecome.""Mr. Vaguener is here. He slept here." Buttifant's eyes caught a gleam of her anxiety: that budding melodrama which blossoms in people of the Welfare type.He shivered; he was not feeling well and, subtly, this woman alarmed him."Go and knock again. Miss Vaguener's in there," he said. "Go on."He pushed her in a peevish way. He hardly knew what he was doing."No, I ain't going on, Mr. Buttifant. I've knocked the best part of ten minutes already at that door. Let him give me the key and I'll go in.""My good soul!" John-Andrew's voice sounded lazily behind them. "Do you want the key? Here it is."He was fully dressed and smiling, he held out the key. Mrs. Welfare took it and went away; across the landing to the other set."What's all the fuss about?" Vaguener asked Buttifant when they were alone and when Buttifant was taking eggs and bacon from the gas oven."She can't make your sister hear. I hope she hasn't taken two of those infernal powders instead of one. That is what people come to with sleeping draughts. Hadn't you better go in yourself and see? Tell her," Buttifant roused, he looked hopeful and tender, " to dress quickly—any-old-how—and come in here to breakfast. There is plenty for three and it would be jolly. I shan't work to-day in any case. My mother is coming up early from Dulwich. She wants me to go shopping. Wedding clothes!"He laughed. He made the tea, in a tidy bachelor way. Then he said,"What a fool I am! Jane won't like it overdrawn.""So it has come to Jane?"John-Andrew was standing idly by; limp, yet horribly alert."No, it hasn't; except in my heart," returned Buttifant.It was the answer he had given his mother.They heard a scream and Mrs. Welfare bundled out from Jane's set."What the devil!" John-Andrew moved, then he stood still."That woman will rouse all London with her yells," he said. "Stop her!"Buttifant had gone. For the second time that morning, he cannoned against Mrs. Welfare. It was on the landing now."I never thought," she said, "to be mixed up in a murder case. What will Mr. Welfare say when I get home?""A murder, a murder!" echoed Buttifant through his white neat lips."She's dead in her bed; lay in' on her side like an infant and stone cold. I went and touched her, when she wouldn't answer. I ain't likely to forget the feel of her hand.""Jane's done it," said John-Andrew, he was standing behind them again. "She said she would but I didn't believe her."He walked into Jane's set alone. The other two looked after him. Buttifant was stunned. Mrs. Welfare was suspicious."You'll swing yet,"she said under her breath and with her eyes balefully following the sturdy small figure that retreated.John-Andrew opened Jane's door, he went up to the bed and touched her cold hand; the fat stiffening hand that would not tap the typewriter again.He looked swiftly round the room for a note. Had she in the middle of the night, after he left her, written another note? By Jove! He'd got to be careful over bits of paper. He looked round and saw nothing. He moved cautiously, turning over her tidily-folded clothes on the chair. Finally, he slid his hand under her pillow, found the account book which she kept for notes, in case she had an idea in the night, and put it in his pocket.She had certainly left him no further word—unless she had gone into the sitting-room and written. He must be first with her papers, he would ransack that roll-top desk directly he had a chance.She had got out of bed, or reached out of bed, and taken two sleeping powders. This he surmised and the inquest proved him right.After he went away with the knife she had got out of bed. She had been strong enough to do what he could not do. She had killed herself.She had been fully aware of his futile attempt. Those hard eyes of hers, talking at last, had conveyed to him, in the grim simplicity of one steady glance, utter knowledge and complete melancholy.He remembered how she had looked. He recalled plenty of amazement and not a touch of terror. She knew that he had come in meaning to murder her, and, as usual, it was Jane, confound her, who did the strong thing: the thing that he could never do. There she lay—definitely dead.Jane had kept herself and she had kept him. She had written Cackle Street. She had killed herself All the strong record was Jane's.He supposed, standing thoughtful and dissective and as cool as a fish, by her bedside for those few, brimful moments, he supposed that he had represented to Jane the sum total of family affection. This was a side of life which she valued inordinately. She made a perfect piety of family ties.Standing there with the knife in his hand last night, he had cut away her last consolation: since—as her note in his pocket confessed—she was already in despair over her work. He must take care of that note; it was his trump card at the inquest.Poor affectionate Jane! And so prolific! Well, she had to die. He turned aside. He went steadily out, his face composed, his gait stiff. He went out on to the landing. Neither Buttifant nor Mrs. Welfare had moved.They were waiting. Frozen anticipation blew around the heads of both. Mrs. Welfare was alert; speechless, she yet appeared voluble. Buttifant looked vague."Dead," said John-Andrew, going up close to him. "You were right. Two sleeping powders, I expect. Here's your mother coming upstairs, Buttifant."Mrs. Buttifant appeared, smiling, anticipant—for Arnold was to help her choose her wedding dress. She was serene and dignified; very fat, a little breathless with so many flights of stairs.She saw the odd trio on the landing and saw that the outer doors of both sets of chambers were open.She appeared to look round apprehensively for Jane and to deplore the presence of Mrs. Welfare.She gave Mrs. Welfare her old clothes; they being, as Mrs. Welfare once remarked, in an access of gratitude, the "same figure." It was a remark you could not possibly forgive. For Mrs. Welfare was mere unruly flesh in a loosely shaped bag, while Mrs. Buttifant preserved contours."There's been a murder, m'm," said Mrs. Welfare in a loud voice and smiling a watery welcome.She had on one of Mrs. Buttifant's skirts at that moment."Murder!"John-Andrew never lifted his voice, but its inflection was dangerous. "That's a serious thing to say, Mrs. Welfare."She turned her back on him. She went up, sobbing and heaving, to Mrs. Buttifant."Oh I am glad another woman's come, m'm. You do want a female at a time like this. I never been mixed up with nothing——""What is it, Arnold?" His mother softly pushed Mrs. Welfare aside, seeming to pat her away. She went to her son.He was standing there, white and small; foolish and speechless. He seemed to be doubling, to be folding up into his boots. He leaned against her heavily.:"Darling!" he said in a silly", broken way. " It's Jane. She's dead, mother."He suddenly fell against her breast as she held her arms round him. He was grimacing.They got him into the studio and stretched him on the sofa."Go and fetch a doctor, Mrs. Welfare," said John-Andrew.He was trying not to smile."Yes I will. And we may want a policeman too,"she retorted, going into the kitchen for her hat and coat. She concluded—as she told Mr. Welfare later—that John-Andrew had 'done them in.'CHAPTER VIII"BE in good time for lunch won't you, Kenneth? Commander and Mrs. Attfield are coming, with Mr. Buttifant if he feels up to it.""I like Buttifant."The clergyman looked at his mother as she sat by the little fire with the open window behind her. "He has very generously offered to paint a picture of St. Agnes, our Patronal Saint.""That is good of him, because he is famous now and the picture will be worth money. The newspaper people say that there is something wonderful about his water-colour work. You wouldn't think so to look at him.""That's just it."Kenneth, answering her, looked worried. "He'd do St. Agnes in oils. Then these artists have a most unorthodox conception and he may produce a Saint that I can't put in the church. Beautiful work but improper.""Well, get back early from your visiting and talk it over with him,"said Mrs. Marshall soothingly. "Make him see your point of view."Part of her mission in life was to placate Kenneth.He lingered at the door, holding it half open in a fat hand.Kenneth was like Jane; fat and pale-coloured, with a perfectly round head—as Jane's had been round. It was quite monastically bald and he was proud of this natural tonsure. He was like Jane to look at and like her in his incredible industry and his mute pathos. He nearly worked himself to death in his parish and it was thankless work, because most of the people were dissenters. Kenneth looked and sounded a commonplace and priggish young man; but he was thoroughly good."It's uphill work in the parish,"he said, looking cherubic and woebegone, "and worse than ever since the Roman Catholic chapel was built on Skidden Hill.""I know what a difficult parish it is, dear boy."His mother smiled at him in her comfortable way. "And it always was, Kenneth. We can't be surprised,"a sense of scandal stole into her voice, "at your poor grandfather going to pieces in the way he did.""I don't think it is a matter we ought to regard lightly, mother.""Lightly! My dear Kenneth, I would not for worlds allow St. Ives to suppose that I was the daughter of John Trewhella. For people suspect that he murdered Dr. Curnow.""We know that he did."Kenneth was uneasy. "It weighs on me.""Don't let it. I take it philosophically, Becca is cynical and nobody else knows. That old woman at Towednack may, but she won't live much longer.""I preach at Towednack on Sunday. The Rector and I exchange pulpits.""I don't like that man's sermons. Well, you'll get back early, won't you, dear?''Mrs. Marshall in her black dress, with her calm face and thickset figure, went on putting careful stitches into a stole she was embroidering. She watched her son go out."He is too conscientious,"she said. "Pity he isn't a Marshall. What a sensible, easy-going person Mr.
Marshall was! As for me——""You're getting into an awful habit of talking to yourself, mother,"Becca burst in, making a flame and a whirl with her red head and her long limbs. "It leads to lunacy. But we can't imagine you going off your head. As for you—what?""I was just sorting us all out as a family, Becca. Of course I am my mother clean through; no nonsense about either of us. She kept an inn and was an excellent woman of business, as you know very well. Kenneth is nearly a Marshall. I wish he was quite; then he wouldn't worry over the parish. He'd just take his stipend and do as much work as the stipend was worth.""There's a lot of poor old Jane in Kenneth."Becca sat down by the open window. "What did you make of me?""I can't make anything."Her mother steadily threaded a needle with green silk."Can't you? Well I can. I'm my grandfather; dear, mad, murdering——""Ssh, Becca! ""John Trewhella, mother."'You are not your grandfather. John-Andrew is exactly. John-Andrew is cold and ambitious and unhappy. You don't remind me of anybody. You are a sport. You are like some of the girls down the Digey.""You wait. I may turn into something rare; a plant that people take cuttings from."Becca grinned at her mother mysteriously. "I suppose the Attfields will be here soon. Didn't you say they were coming to lunch?""Yes, with Mr. Buttifant if he's well enough.""Do you like Mr. Buttifant, mother?""Yes, do you?""Immensely. I'm sorry for him.""You need not be. He has done the thing he wanted to.""That's something."Becca rucked up her black skirt and swung her foot fast."It is everything, my dear. You see he was doing that picture-book work and hating it, but he had to
do it for money and to keep his mother. Then he got this illness, which upset his work altogether, then he
collected the water-colours and had a little show——""And the thing was done."Becca looked eager. "I suppose it comes like that—the thing you want. It comes suddenly, doesn't it? You blink—and there it is!""If it comes at all,"her mother sounded prudent. "It came to Mr. Buttifant and if he hadn't been taken suddenly ill and the very day when poor Jane died, which was a queer coincidence, he might never have been famous at all. He would have kept on being—now what does he call himself—a pot boiler."No, he wouldn't. He was only waiting to get his mother off his hands; he has told me so.""He seems to tell you a great deal.""He does; but not more than his mother tells you."The girl's foot swung faster. Her mother regarded her. She wanted Becca to marry Buttifant. She had not thought much of Buttifant when he was a black and white artist, living queerly in what she persisted in calling "apartments"on the same landing as Jane. But Buttifant, with his mother married to a person so rich and creditable as Commander Attfield and Buttifant with his sudden exclusive fame as a water-colour painter of gift and originality, presented himself in another light. Mrs. Marshall wasbourgeois in her blood: she now considered Buttifant to be a gentleman: at the time of Jane's tea-party he had been merely a polite little hardworking oddity.She would have preferred Becca not to marry. She was forced, whimsically and regretfully, to the conclusion that Becca must; or be embittered. She had only produced in her children one perfect celibate, not two. And Becca must not marry John-Andrew; for it would make her miserable. John-Andrew was cold, he was unfitted for marriage. His aunt understood him, she sympathised with him and—did not wish him to be perverted. Buttifant was on the spot and in the mood. For she suspected that he had been attracted by Jane, as Becca had been attracted by John-Andrew.Mrs. Marshall stood so cynically outside any personal interest in love affairs, that she became a subtle student of them."He wasn't really ill, mother; it was his eyes. He ought to have had glasses from the first. He has long sight and was doing short work.""Short work, Becca?""Sticking his face close up to that scratchy black and white stuff, mother. He had been feeling funny in his eyes for a long time. The oculist said he only knew of one other case; and that was a watchmaker. He's all right now he has glasses but they do make him look a fright.""Glasses always do; and he is no worse than other people. What are looks, my dear?""Everything,"said Becca succinctly. "Isn't that why father married you: and delivered you from grandfather, with his mad ways and bad temper, and made you a well-to-do widow before you were forty? I'm sure he didn't marry you for your warm affections."The girl laughed rather savagely."My warm affections! Certainly not."Her mother was affronted. "As for looks, Becca——""Don't simper, dear. You know you are good looking, in your nice blonde middle class—no, not middle class, lower class way. Is a public-house keeper lower class,—or what class?""Goodness knows, Becca. And I wish you wouldn't be so blunt about it.""But you were blunt just now; you said you were exactly like my grandmother. I should think it was awfully jolly to keep an inn. And here are the Attfields coming.""With Mr. Buttifant?""With Mr. Buttifant."The girl met her mother's glance drolly.Then she stooped and gave her a kiss."It won't do, mother.""What won't do?""Mr. Buttifant. He doesn't want me and I wouldn't have him,""Well, in any case,"Mrs. Marshall blushed and looked gawky; she covered her embroidered stole with tissue paper and put it in the work table, "they are very nice neighbours. And we need not bother about anything else just yet. I am glad the Commander is building a house at Carbis Bay. They will spend every autumn there. It is only natural that an old sailor should wish to be near the sea. And Mr. Buttifant will be able to paint.""He finds Cornish landscape very stimulating,"said Becca."Does he? I am glad."Mrs. Marshall spoke heartily and as if the Cornish landscape were a tonic which would put flesh on Buttifant's body and blood into his face.She went to the house door, in the homely country way, to greet her guests.It was late November: mellow tints and sweet airs: the time of high storms and great penitences, down here in Cornwall.The house door of the Rectory was wide. It opened out from the flagged hall with its raftered ceiling.Mrs. Marshall stood in the doorway and autumn leaves whirled in; for there was always a gale, sweet or shrewish, through these weeks of autumn. There were days when the dry leaves curled and danced upon the stones and days when they lay upon them in a sodden brown. Up till Christmas it was always mild enough to have doors and windows open.Mrs. Marshall stood there. Becca, her red head in a glory, her yellow face in contrast, was behind. Commander Attfield and his wife, with Buttifant and Kenneth, came up the path. They came between well-filled flower borders. Everything was prolific. The garden expressed Mrs. Marshall's practical mind. The great fuchsia bushes—or some just like them—which John Trewhella had left in his slovenly garden in 1854 flowered in their old places. They darkened the study window. The little wistful red flowers hung thick upon the rapidly baring brown stalks."We met such a delightful man at the top of Barnoon,"Buttifant's mother said, in her slow way—soft and enthusiastic; comfortable, complacent: "quite a foreign type. He gave me such a smile, didn't he, William? And he touched his hat."The Commander laughed, he looked adoringly at his ample wife: the delectable blossom that he had gathered after thirty years."A haughty looking savage chap; I've seen plenty like him abroad, Aggie."He shook hands with Mrs. Marshall."That must have been Thomas Nancurvis,"Becca said to her brother as they passed through the cool hall."Except that he would never touch his hat to anybody; not even Mrs. Attfield."The clergyman said this and he looked distrustfully at Buttifant's mother.She was attractive, but she ought to realise that she was too old to attract. There was ample Puritan m Kenneth; to him, she was something of the Scarlet Woman; watered down and well bred—but reprehensible. He thought her bad for Becca. His sister gave him moments of anxiety. The ways of women disagreed with him."There is something about my wife that arouses devotion,"said the Commander simply.He was absurd in his adulation and enormously touching. Buttifant looked across at his mother; she seemed to bloom and droop. She was like an overblown, beautiful peony; he was in love with her himself. His eyes said to her:'So you've indulged him! He calls you Aggie!'They went in to lunch."What a delightful old house this is! "the Commander looked about him at wide spaces and cradled nooks: room after room leading from the hall; great niches of big hearths, window seats that were deep and all of it owing such generous proportion to the thickness of the stone walls."The little place we are building at Carbis Bay, Aggie, what a cockle shell by comparison! ""It won't be red—the Cornish landscape has me to thank for that."Buttifant laughed and took his place. "I persuaded the Commander,"he spoke to Kenneth, "to have a grey house. You must always build of the material you find to hand. Red houses are all very well in Surrey and they are beautiful at Torquay, with its rosy sandstone. But here! A red house here is as great an outrage as one would be upon the South-Downs. Not quite because the South-Downs are my passion."He loved them and, thinking of them, he retreated from this hospitable company; a genial gathering of feeding folk talking so frothily; yet in a very eloquent house. There was plenty of mystery and sadness here—had he known. The guilty ghost of John Trewhella still inhabited it. John Trewhella's love, an old widow woman at Towednack, had lived here in heart since 1854.Buttifant was thinking of his own hurt,—again, with agony so literal that he nearly cried out, he could imagine Jane lying dead, as she lay last May. He had not seen her lying dead. This was November. He had been ill. Now he came crawling back—to strength, to desire, to hopelessness. His dear, his noisy, vulgar Jane was dead. He never could win her. This world did not hold her.Just to speak of the South-Downs brought her to him: although they had never been on the incomparable hills together. Those hills were nearer his heart than anything in England or out of it and when he left Gray's Inn on Sundays it had been to tramp over them. He knew them—clothed and naked! He knew the beech woods and the dotted, brushy junipers, and knew, better, the unclothed hills, bare and high, that spring east of the Adur[.] Only three weeks before she died he had made Jane promise that when she got time she would go with him to Firle Beacon.They were to have gone without John-Andrew. Buttifant had imagined them sitting alone in strong sunlight through the long day; sea beneath, ships undulating along the golden line of horizon.And how Jane's voice would have carried in that clear air! Her voice—that went through his head! Why did he want her so? He would never—in this world—know why. He only knew he did want and that nothing else would do.They had not gone to Firle. Jane had never found tune. Shoddy activities had beset her throughout, as they had beset him. Neither of them had lived, they had debased Time. She had been keeping herself and John-Andrew, he had been keeping his family. He looked across the table at his mother; charming, shallow, supremely selfish; automatically getting what she wanted. His mother had lost him Jane. While he had been doing black and white work, while he had been hounded on by Branch to do more, while he had been paying school bills and housekeeping bills and dressmaking bills, hand over hand, he might have married Jane. His courage should have compelled consent. He had been a coward and now the coward's fate was his. Jane was his soul's desire and she was dead.He sat looking at his mother; the mother he immensely admired. He austerely considered himself justified in resenting her, as a man should resent a parasite. His mother had done him the worst injury; she had sealed his eyes to spiritual things.He blamed his mother—since he must blame somebody. He blamed her for his own weakness, for his puny wanting to feel sure. She had hung round his neck, a dead weight: as thousands of women hang round thousands of men; she had made him want to see whole vistas of the necessary bread and butter instead of gratefully eating his daily slice. She had taken it for granted that neither she nor Reggie nor Bernie could do without a single thing; nothing—neither water-colours nor Jane—must imperil the three. They were all off his hands now—and Jane was dead!Moreover, he was celebrated in his way. He was safe, he had reached the goal of all imaginative workers: he could, for the rest of his life, do the work he loved and feel sure of being paid for it: not much perhaps, yet enough. This had come to him; the thing that mattered so much, the thing that he had prayed for. Every day as he had stood at his easel in Gray's Inn hard upon unworthy work, he had breathed forth vague petitions. Through the rain of letters and telegrams and telephone messages asking for work, through the acceptable raining of cheques that paid for the work, his prayer had sounded. It was answered.Coming out of one fever and falling, forthwith, into another of a different order, he had put his water-colours together and exhibited them. It was a wrong time; the holiday season not over, London half empty. Yet his work boomed. It was important enough to triumph over disadvantage. He found himself acclaimed as an influence. He was safe; the great black terror—of poverty, of obscurity—was off him. He had got there. That was it.God had granted to him all things—and they came too late. He had everything but Jane—and she was all he wanted. Jane was dead: never once had they trodden the hills together, or even walked along a little lane or dived into a wood. He had never seen her in a holiday mood. She would have been a regular hoyden, walking the world in violent raiment—and he would have loved it all.How Jane would have shouted over his success with water-colours and bluntly called his belauding critics a set of colour-blind fools! Jane had been so divinely cocksure; she knew everything!Upon the hills, he would have modulated her: by the virtue of the hills, by the fire of his own keen, inconsequent passion. He would have transmuted Jane's metal. He would have buried her vulgarity and her coldness as surely as Highgate Cemetery buried her body now.Never had she found time to go with him to Firle. On that great hill—thick with those aromatic bloomings that cling to the ancient turf—he would have won her. For a man must possess a woman when they are alone upon a hill: with the sea to sight, with the sound of sheep bells and the smell of flowers; at the ear and on the shoulder. He would have won her. He would have created, up there upon Firle Beacon, a new, a warm, a fine Jane.He and she would have succeeded the generations of lovers who had rejoiced up there; they would have forerun those that are unborn.It seemed to him that he sat silent for hours at this Cornish table but it was only a moment or so. Mrs. Marshall's voice jarred him as she took up his topic."Oh the South-Downs! You don't mean to say, Mr. Buttifant, that you like that dreary range near Newhaven? I always think that when one comes back from the Continent and gets into the train for Victoria those hills are so depressing. May I send you some fish? An aunt of my late husband's——"Her voice became narrative; her son and daughter convulsively composed themselves for the recital of a crusted family joke. Kenneth was thinking in conscientious travail, 'She has told them this yarn before! '"Became engaged to a gentleman called Mackrill," continued Mrs. Marshall, the pleasant smile broadening on her homely face. "So, to avoid anycontretemps, she never afterwards at table saidwhat fish she was serving but just 'May I send you some fish?' At the wedding breakfast she unfortunately said to the bridegroom's father, 'Fish, Mr. Lobster?' Those two were never on pleasant terms for the rest of their days. I think it affected the young couple's happiness.""That story," Kenneth remarked in his serious way, "always made John-Andrew so angry.""You speak as if he were dead, Kenneth."Becca was sharp."So he is—to us. We haven't seen him since the day of poor Jane's funeral. And I must admit that since John-Andrew lost his Faith I haven't had much in common with him," the young priest said curtly."Don't talk about Jane's funeral," his mother was quick. "I shall never forget that dreadful time. And if there is one cemetery more gloomy than the rest——""John-Andrew," Kenneth frowned, "should have had Jane buried here. But he was very obstinate and also he was very mean over money. When he's rolling in money!""He wasn't rolling then and he was very upset." Mrs. Attfield spoke. "We all were. Everything happened at once. She was dead and you were so ill, Arnold. And Mr. Vaguener was so quiet; it was worse than any amount of fuss. I'm so glad I had all your things taken away from that place and warehoused while you were unconscious and could not protest. I can't bear the idea of your ever going back to Gray's Inn.""I shall go back and before long, mother."Buttifant sounded dogged."I shall have to go to London and I shall look up John-Andrew. As to rolling in money, I don't suppose he has rolled far yet.""Well, you can't have your old set of chambers, dear. It's let, isn't it, Willie?"'Yes, I had the curiosity last time I was in London to go into South Square," said the Commander. "There's another name painted up.""John-Andrew will give me a bed." Buttifant sounded so deadly that the table stopped eating. "I haven't seen him since he became such a swell.""Oh but you are a swell too." Mrs. Marshall was kindly. She had the usual idea: that these eccentric creatures should be encouraged!"Not so big as he is. Just think ofCackle Street! Such an instant success and so uncannily clever. It is sure of a long run. I didn't think he had it in him. Poor old chap! I suppose he was worrying it out in Gray's Inn when he was so grumpy.""I suppose," Kenneth was solemn, "that my cousin will make a fortune?""Rather!" Buttifant crowed in his certainty.'You can make a living for life out of just a moderate play, Jane told me so," said Becca, flushing up and looking eager. "That was the time when she was in bed with bronchitis. She was awfully worried over money.""She always worried over money." Buttifant pecked at his fish."Which is very wrong," remarked Kenneth, speaking as if he said grace."Awfully wrong—when you're got plenty," his sister told him.Becca and Kenneth get upon each other's nerves. This was another reason why Becca should marry. Mrs. Marshall looked at Buttifant."Poor Jane! If only she had lived she would have had plenty," she said. "Life is very hard upon some people. If you do go to London, Mr. Buttifant, and if you do see Johnny give him my love and ask him why he never answered my letter. I wrote to him directly his play had such a good notice in theMorning Post.""I shall see him, Mrs. Marshall; and I'll remember.""But not until after Christmas, Arnold." His mother was firm. "We shall be in London then and I can look after you. I can help you to find rooms.""He doesn't want rooms, he can live with us. The house in Bedford Square is big enough for everybody," said the Commander, with his usual hearty and generous inflections."I should be an awful nuisance to everybody," Buttifant returned. "I must have my own little place. You shall help choose it, mother. Find me something near Bedford Square."The expansive and charming woman looked along the table at her son; at his neat profile and faultless insignificant nose. She looked at a face which, as she often told him, was so well tailored. Arnold's appearance was well-bred and nugatory; yet he was the one man she had not been able to twist right round her finger. He had his reservations of obstinacy —over Jane Vaguener for instance. Mrs. Attfield looked pious: she could not help feeling glad that Jane was dead!After lunch she saw Arnold led into Kenneth's study."They want to talk over the S. Agnes,' said Mrs. Marshall, going with her into the drawing-room. "In painting for the Church there are limitations. Kenneth will explain. He's a very good ceremonialist. You may have seen his letters in theChurch Times.""TheChurch Times! Oh really?" breathed Mrs. Attfield.Becca and the Commander were in the garden, she pointing out clumps of perennials which should be divided before the frosts came and sent to Carbis Bay to stock his new flower borders."It is dull for Becca down in Cornwall." Mrs. Marshall started embroidering her stole. "I wish sometimes that——""But she will." Mrs. Attfield smiled warmly. "Marry you mean?""Yes, that's what I mean."They nodded at each other. Upon each face was a beam.This being settled between them, they were gratified when Becca announced her intention of walking part of the way back with the Attfields, who had taken a furnished house on Barnoon Hill, while their own house was building. They had stayed to tea and it was already dusk.Mrs. Marshall stood at the window watching the party cross the field and get over the stone stile. Buttifant looked neat and white and kind, Becca, in her very walk, seemed to gambol. Becca's legs were too long and unruly. She was like a great big puppy. She was also like——Mrs. Marshall turned round to her son who stood behind her."Isn't Becca like the old Towednack woman? I notice it more and more?""It is a type, mother. Other girls and other old women at St. Ives are like Becca and Mrs. Polmeor. Why do you always say 'the old woman at Towednack'? It isn't charitable?""I don't like her. She's called Rebecca—which is my name. Then I feel positive that she knows about your grandfather and knows that we are not Vagueners at all, but Trewhellas. She seems to be grinning at us. She only pays me a formal call twice a year, but it makes me most uncomfortable to see her in the drawing-room, with those little glittering old eyes roving about. That yellow head and those eyes! She's like a toad.""Not more than Becca will be at the same age, mother.""Fancy Becca nearly ninety!" the mother's laugh was incredulous. "Well, I shan't be alive to see."Her son kissed her conscientiously upon the broad homely face."Don't be irrational," he pleaded. "It isn't like you."The old woman at Towednack? Then I won't say it any more. Did you and Mr. Buttifant settle about the S. Agnes?""He saw my point of view," Kenneth sounded doubtful, "but these artists are headstrong. You wouldn't think so to look at him. We are going to talk it over when he comes down again.""He's going to London after Christmas, isn't he? ""He'll go before. You like just that shade of red?"He asked her this as she threaded her needle with silk for the stole."Yes. I think so. But when it comes to starting on that festal chasuble for you, Kenneth, I shan't trust my own ideas. I must go to Bodiam."There was an authority upon vestments living at Bodiam.Becca said to Buttifant as they walked towards Barnoon,"When you have seen John-Andrew, write to me and say just what you make of him. Something is sure to happen to him before long."She met Buttifant's eyes. He admired those funny dark ones of hers; just slantwise pansy petals, of the blackest grown."If anything happens, you want to know?" he asked.Looking at each other in the dying light understanding became exchanged. They learnt things about each other. Becca said roughly:"You know that I love John-Andrew? I don t mind saying this to you because you loved Jane.""Yes." Buttifant, still walking, yet became motionless in effect: it seemed as if even his heart stopped while he answered, "I did love Jane.""I'm sorry." Becca's hand gripped his. "She didn't care for love and John-Andrew doesn't but——""You will make him?""I will make him, as you would have made Jane.""There is nothing to stop you." Buttifant sounded bitterly self-scorning. "Vaguener will have plenty of money now.""I suppose he will and I've got some, but money doesn't count.""It does—when you haven't got any counting to do. You said that to your brother at lunch.""So I did. AndCackle Street does mean money?""Without doubt. Vaguener's all right.""I don't think he is. I think that the shock and the joy of it will be too much. Go to London soon. Find out. Send for me if I'm wanted.""Don't worry about him. He's all right. But I will go soon and I will write to you.""You'll tell me everything?""Everything."Neither of them assumed what a thing there would be to tell. Becca had a sense of drama; born in her, provoked by her, but Buttifant kept a practical view of John-Andrew. He imagined him making himself comfortable, revelling in money and in the relief from Jane. How he would hug himself over Cackle Street! And what a clever chap he was! He was by this time conceited and bragging: he had doubtless become a Gabriel Best. He was certainly insufferable. Buttifant wanted to see him. He felt a hunger for that set in South Square. Had Vaguener kept Jane's things: the odd and end rubbish that she bought so freely and scattered about the place?He parted from Becca at the corner of the path, just where the town is seen. His mother and Commander Attfield were well ahead and looking like lovers, as one of them was.He turned back to look after the girl—with that quick haughty walk of hers, with that fiery head! She was grand and fine; she understood him, she appealed to him. So why couldn't they fall in love with each other, marry and be happy ever after? Out of the question—on each side. He would have given the whole of Becca—for just Jane's finger. Those fingers of Jane's, thick; very often dyed violet from her typewriting ribbon. He could see them, he could feel the way they felt.As to Becca, she was mad—for John-Andrew. She would have laughed at any other lovemaking—or stamped upon it.She wanted that disagreeable little dark chap; with his violence and his genius. No other man would do.Buttifant watched the girl go; in the pathos of her youth and her vitality. What would happen to Becca? Would she get John-Andrew and if she did would he suffice?She might be an old maid. John-Andrew, who was more than a touch mad, might utterly refuse her. Buttifant wondered. Jane was dead, but these two were alive—with their chapter to finish.He walked after his mother and her second husband. He envied that sublimely besotted sailor man going on in front. He had got the woman he wanted. He had waited thirty years—yet there she was!Buttifant thought of Jane's grave, which he had never seen. For when he came out of the fever of his illness he fell into the even more delirious fever of his water-colours. This had absorbed and saved him. Then came success. He must go to LondonBecca walked away from him. She was staring straight before her at the hills; at Rosewall which seemed to hang immediately above the church, at Buttermilk, beyond it and nearer to Zennor. Her face softened and grew desperate; for these hills had their effect upon Cornish lovers. She stuck out her arms, long and thinnish, not quite developed. She was of the type that takes a long time growing up. The most mature appeal was in those immature arms, nevertheless. She looked desirable and mad."Johnny!" she breathed in a quick long whisper, "Johnny, Johnny!"Her head flung back, then dropped. She quivered. Fierce tears ran down her face.Old Rebecca Polmeor at Towednack, widow of the late Rector and going on for ninety, had looked at Rosewall hill and stood like that and spoken like that very often. Stolen soliloquy was the recitative of her living. As maiden, as wife, as widow; as young, as old; with sin or without it. She did not know, she did not care. She had loved one man—a little cold dark man and a murderer. She had sent him away, but she kept on wanting him for the whole of her long, long life. She talked to the hills about him, she told them. When she heard that he was dead, when his son came back under another name—yet instantly recognised by her—When his grandchildren were born: that made no difference to her invincibly youthful heart. To the world, Rebecca Polmeor would have been in her moods of confession, absurd and ancient: to the hills, she remained heroic and always young.Becca wiped her eyes and walked on; flaming, mystified and ashamed. She looked straight ahead and saw Gabriel Best coming. He came from the square stone house where his mother farmed and upon which he had worked. He came quickly, in a walk that was Cockneyfied, yet loutish: he had spoiled himself for perfect harmony either in town or country. He stopped before Becca and said humbly:"I saw you all leave the Rectory and go towards Barnoon. I followed, I sneaked along behind. I waited until Buttifant left you. I felt you were my betters. Down here in Cornwall, that feeling comes back.""Gabriel! I thought you were in London writing wonderful stories and being made a fuss of. Did you see me cry?" She turned in a sudden panic, looking red and then yellow. "Did you hear me talking to the hill?""Wouldn't matter if I did. I've said lots of things to that hill. It knows all I've got."When Gabriel said this, his voice acquired some Buttifant's unfailing sweetness."You've put that sort of talk in books," Becca reminded him sullenly. "I'm sick of books and writing people—with their immodest way of telling everything. Think of my poor cousin Jane! ""Think of your poor cousin John-Andrew!" Gabriel, reminding her, turned bitter. "Think of him andCackle Street. You gave him the name for that play.""I said to Jane that you were all of you living in what seemed to me a place called Cackle Street. Did she tell you?""Yes, she told me.""You all tell each other. Is John-Andrew's play about writing people?""Not a bit; Vaguener's only taken the title and twisted things round to make it fit.""I see. Is it really a good play?""Splendid!" Gabriel was enthusiastic and grudging. "I can't think how he did it.""Tell me all about it?""No, I won't. I want to talk about myself. I only came from Paddington this morning and I'm going back tomorrow morning—unless you ask me to stop."'You ought to stop. You never ought to go ten miles out of St. Ives."She looked at him, magnificent: as he appeared in the lovely sunset and the incomparable land. Light from the hill, with its glowing radiance and its ragged, sodden wine dregs of the turning bracken, fell upon their faces; showing Gabriel's strong peasant colours, the hue soaked into him; the honourable tinting of a line of labouring ancestors. Bests had been farming at Hellesveor from the beginning. The light fell on Becca too, showing her weird contradictions of red hair and yellow skin and little dark eyes that shone and sulked. There were girls like her and men like him in the adorable byways that led up from the sea into the town; girls and men wooing or mated, Cornish of the Cornish; ancient and part of the place.They stood there, with the instinctive pose of lovers, for both were shaken by desire. The grand, one mood of the growing world encompassed them. It seemed natural, inevitable; that they should drift into prolific matrimony. For they expressed young love at its sturdiest. An impartial looker on would have said, 'If these two don't increase and multiply, what an astonishing muddle old Nature is making of things.'Becca said,"You don't belong to leave St. Ives, Gabriel.""I don't, nor do you.""I shan't ever leave St. Ives."She told him this and looked round proudly; at the flaming land, at the violet sea. The fishing fleet was out and all the little lights were stars. The sea was the firmament upside down."But I must," he sounded fatalistic. "London's got me.""Oh yes, you'll go back and write books. You'll come down now and then to feed at St. Ives; to suck stories out of people.""Books!" Gabriel was quick. "I'm tired of books.""But you were so proud. And people made such a fuss of you.""I was a new fashion, and fashions change.I was a rustic, I smelt of milk and manure. They expected to be diverted by me. They thought I'd drink my tea out of my saucer and——""And blow it." Becca laughed. "I expected that when you had tea with us in Berners Street.""I can't think of book writing and book people." He interrupted her, lie took her hands, by the intent solemnity of his look, he struck her jesting dead—"Not with you; not under Rosewall, not with the night coming. You understand?""Very well." Becca was frigid."It was my love for you that made me able to write the Cornish stories. Love wrings that sort of thing out of us, as labour wrings sweat.""I'm sorry. Sorry, Gabriel. Don't say any more."Becca was taking this wooing pitifully. Buttifant was still walking towards Barnoon and still wondering how she would treat any declaration that did not come from John-Andrew."I must say it. I've come down to say it. You've thought me first a farming boy and then a freak. You've looked past and over me; when I drove down the Stennack with the milk carts; or carried pitchers from the reservoir. You've watched me driving cows and feeding pigs and seen me on the threshing machine—and I've been just a part of the landscape. I belonged to the look and the sound of Cornwall. I was like the fuchsia bushes outside your brother's study window. You expected me, you took me for granted. Wasn't that it?"She nodded."That was it. That is it still. And will be it, Gabriel."She was merciless but gentle. She seemed to study him, to fit him in with her own thoughts and her own scheme. She might have been Jane, standing there looking at him, listening to him, missing nothing."Then I went off and wrote a book about the things and the people we know. But everybody else didn't know—so I was a new taste. They want new dishes in London. You thought me peculiar and a little insolent, for daring to leave the milk cart and the dung cart and the plough and the sty——""All those things that suit you, Gabriel; that make you big and simple and at home.""That's what mother thinks. And she says I've brought disgrace on the chapel. Then I lost my head and bragged and you were all laughing at me in London. I don't wonder. I knew it—but I couldn't help it. I was transplanted; my roots were all over the place. I'd never in my life seen a woman in evening dress—not to take her on equal terms. I'd seen you and your mother at concerts down here. But we sat at the back on benches and you and your friends were in the front rows on chairs. I'd never had more than one fork to manage at dinnertime and never got into a fitted bath in my life. It was all new; it made me drunk and it made me uncomfortable. My clothes were strange. The wonderful thing is that I didn't put them on hind side before.""You look very nice in them, but you looked better before," Becca told him. "You used to wear an old jacket. I remember it moving across the town place, going from the shed to the barn, winter after winter. It was black first and then it went green and then it went like the sea—when the sea is sulky. It was part of every winter, that jacket—and it was all you."Gabriel was looking at her, he was listening."I suppose," he said, after a long, long while, through which pause their eyes met—challenging, pleading, refusing—" that I shall go back to London and put that—the things you've said about my old jacket, the way you look saying it—into books. And that will be my life. For I've fallen between two stools. I'm no good down in Cornwall any more; yet I don't belong to leave it for London."The gulping that came through the fading light was his sob: boyish, bitter, irresistible."Don't," said Becca.She touched him.Instantly he drew her up to his hip."Let me, let me," he begged."Let you? Let you?""Marry you. Nobody could give you such a love. Don't send me away. To send me away seems such awful waste.""You go back to Paddington to-night," she was resolute.With dignity that he could not withstand, she drew right away. Their flesh did not touch any more."It isn't any good? Never?""Never, Gabriel. But I wish that you could be in Cornwall—as you were before. That I could see you, that——""You want me as a property; an old greeny jacket stuck upon a stick. That won't do. I'm a man, not a thing to scare birds."He turned."You are going, Gabriel?"The light was going fast. Directly he stepped back, his outlines became teasing."I'm going. Just to kiss my mother, then to the station. I've got to write books and get money for them. That's to be my life. But if I could take your hand, Becca, and lead you softly up to the top of Rosewall, books past and books to be might burn."He had never called her Becca before. She started. Gabriel observed."There you are!" He was sore at once. "Because I said Becca, you remembered that I am not what you call a gentleman. I never shall be. Nothing I can do, no height I can attain will change me—for Cornish folk.""No, no—indeed! I wasn't thinking that."She was anguished: he was telling the truth."You can't get away from it," he went on. "None of you can. You say that it is snobbish for outside things to make a difference. Yet if you married me and if I put my knife in my mouth——""Which you wouldn't.""Oh I might! When I'd got you, I should revert to type, very likely. For when I'm my true man I love the rough way best. It's bigger. In my unbosomed moments I should become a coarse and picturesque working man—and you would hate me.""I should hate to feel you were cutting your mouth."She tried to jest. Gabriel approached her; he came out of the dimness with a bound, falling on her again."Don't be light," he besought.She put her hands steadily on his broad shoulders, she looked into the handsome face, that was merging in with night."Not light," she said solemnly—"never. Don't think that. Now you go away; for it isn't any good. It never would be.""Yes—dear," he put up his own hands, seized hers in a flurry and fondled them nervously. "I'll go."Becca was feeling all his ravenous kisses fall upon her hands; the first kisses that had touched her. He dropped her hands at last and slid out of vision.Night was soft, earth in the field was soft. She could hear the cattle-like pad of his feet on the grass and she could hear the sea down there by Clodgy. All the stars—those lights hanging from the herring boats—moved by in a wistful glory.CHAPTER IXBUTTIFANT walked about Highgate Cemetery, looking for the St. Pancras burial ground. Before he left St. Ives for London he had promised his mother that he would not stay with Vaguener in Gray's Inn—assuming Vaguener asked him! He had promised to stay at an hotel until she could come up to town and choose rooms for him. This would be in a few days. He had put up at the First Avenue—which was as near Gray's Inn as he could get.He had only left Cornwall the evening before and he had not yet seen John-Andrew. It seemed to him that, first, he must go to Jane: his noisy Jane, in her new silent home. He had found out from Mrs. Marshall just where the grave was and, quite recently, John-Andrew had written curtly to his relatives saying the stone was up.This was March. Buttifant since November had been ill again—in that weak dim way, the way without a name to it, which pursues people after some great shock.He looked little and vacuous and quiet as he poked about in the vast cemetery alone.It was one of those days of naked sunlight when most people say gladly to each other, 'What lovely weather we are having.' The brisk spring wind blew and daffodils nodded jauntily upon many graves.On this hard day, with light so brutally candid, with nothing veiled at all; not only tombstones stood out clear, but the very histories of those lying beneath appeared to be betrayed. So Buttifant felt, in his grieved exalted mood, walking about the burial grounds alone.He turned down a side path, brightly gravelled, as all the paths were. In the distance, a man was planting things upon a grave; a little way off, another man was digging a new one.Overhead, there was the steady blue sky with here and there a bunch of pink almond blossom flung against it. Birds were singing carelessly. The graves were hard, green and very neat.There was Jane's grave and her new clean stone above it. There was the sharp lettering of her name JANE VAGUENER. It was a marble stone and there was a marble coping round the grave. Within this space, little evergreen trees were planted. Buttifant stood looking down; he held a wreath of white flowers which he had bought at a florist's just outside the cemetery gates. It swung in his hands.Presently he stooped and put his wreath between the little evergreens. He put it near the headstone.Then he heard a laugh at his elbow and looking round saw Vaguener standing very close to him."My dear fellow," Jane's brother said, without preamble, "Jane will be so unhappy when those lilies turn brown. Don't you know Jane better than that? Jane! Always tidy and up to date!"Buttifant stepped back, looking assaulted. His nerves would not stand very much.He stared at Vaguener, who had not changed; except that he was beautifully turned out—perhaps a little too dandified and well brushed."You startled me," he said, putting out his hand. "You came so quietly.""I came from behind the stone." Vaguener took his hand, holding on to it. "I was here before you. I come every day to look at her grave.""You do?""I do. I was very fond of Jane—you ought to know that. You saw enough of our life together. I am, in fact, an affectionate man and I can be fond of people, so long as they give me no trouble, so long as they don't get in my way."Vaguener laughed again. Buttifant became aware of an insensible change in him. This was another man, this was not the John-Andrew of Jane's time. HadCackle Street done it? Or was there something else?"And you were in love with her. Poor old chap! "John-Andrew's voice sounded soft, he looked calm. He looked cautious also; as if he had taught himself to keep guard."Yes." Buttifant was simple. "I was in love with her.""You wanted to marry her. Yet all you can do for her now is to litter her grave with a five shilling wreath. Was it five?"Jane's brother laughed again, then stopped."Oh I don't know. Upon my soul I don't re-member." Buttifant shook; limbs and voice. "I had to bring it, that's all.""Yes, you had to," John-Andrew nodded. "People must. Queer isn't it? I heard the other day of a woman who lost her only son, a sailor. He was drowned and the body never recovered. She bought a wreath and laid it at the foot of Nelson's column. I thought of working that into my new play.""A new play? Already! I haven't seenCackle Street yet. I'm going to-night.""Cackle Street is rubbish." John-Andrew was fierce. "The one I am on now is infinitely better. Wait till you see that."He turned abruptly from the grave. Buttifant, giving it a last look, followed. For where was the use of staying? He would not hear Jane's shrill, matter-of-fact voice any more.If he wanted to come again and be sentimental (he would try not to be) there were years and years left him; through which to fight the idea or indulge it.He walked beside her brother along the gingery gravel path and he said, in his quiet, melodious way:"I never said anything to her—for where was the good? She was too busy and so was I. Life Was such a grind and we couldn't leave off for lovemaking.""But you've done well with your water-colours, in a modest way." Vaguener was insolently patronising.I haven't seen them but I've heard what people say. I always believed in your water-colours, always.""Yes, they are all right; so the world seems to think." Buttifant was polite, yet he was distant and the indignant blood crept into his face, settling in one spot. "We've both pulled off what we wanted to, Vaguener, but it is too late.""Too late?""For Jane.""Oh yes, Jane; yes of course—Jane."Vaguener seemed confused. He clapped his hands to his ears then he drew them down and dived them into his pockets."Cackle Street," he said grandiloquently, "is the thing. There hasn't been such a comedy since Sheridan. But—and I repeat it, Buttifant—Cackle Street is nothing; it is the merest rubbish—a thing that Jane could have done—compared to my new play. I finished the second act yesterday morning."He turned round, he went pattering back to the grave. Buttifant went after him; so they stood beside Jane once more: two commonplace little men, one dark, one fair; and each one wrung by his own particular pain."Yes," said John-Andrew, looking down and nodding wildly. "You could have done Cackle Street, Jane, my dear girl. You could have ticked it off like this upon your infernal typewriter."He played his fingers up and down in the air.Buttifant thought of Becca. She had said that John-Andrew would not be able to stand success, and she was right.Becca loved John-Andrew and, when you love, you do not need argument nor proof, you divine.Buttifant had loved Jane—and did he need anyone to tell him anything about her?He stared at her grave. They stood, these two men, beside the grave of this industrious woman. They shuddered and flinched. Jane, so practical in life, so of the robust daylight, so like the burly blustering day which was passing now, became in death some subtle object.John-Andrew said,"We do no good by standing here. Why did you let me come back? I want somebody to look after me, Buttifant."He spoke as if he were going to cry. Buttifant had heard that mood of the voice before; in Gray's Inn and when John-Andrew was living upon Jane—and being heartily reminded of it very often!They walked away again. Buttifant said when they regained the main drive leading to the entrance gates of the cemetery,"My feeling for her—was it the true thing? I can't rest for asking myself. If it had been, shouldn't I have taken her by storm?""Don't ask me. What do I care about love? "demanded Vaguener in his voice of outrage."Plenty of love inCackle Street. I've read the press notices," Buttifant reminded him."Oh yes;Cackle Street. Plenty of love in everything Jane did. But we neither of us care about love; it does not agree with us as a family.""Except your cousin Becca.""Becca!" John-Andrew was scornful. "She's heaped her plate with everybody else's share."They walked on, they were near the gate.Buttifant could think only of Jane. To leave her lying there seemed unreal, impossible. It would have been so natural to hear her shouting good-humouredly behind them. He half expected her to try and catch them up."I've elaborated my feeling for her since she died," he returned to his dreary soliloquy. "I've been ill, for one thing, and——""Yes, I heard you've been ill. I'm sorry." John-Andrew squeezed his arm."And illness," Buttifant continued, "makes you see things as they are. You lie, stripped, in your sick bed. And you strip the rest of the world. Then she had such a dastardly ending that——""Dastardly!" Vaguener dropped his arm. "You speak as if she'd been murdered.""It was murder." Buttifant was resolute."The impulse that drove her to take those powders was beyond her control. She was worked to death. She was murdered by those shocking yarns which she tapped off so glibly and which Branch sold like hot cakes.""If you like to put it that way." John-Andrew's hands went up to his ears, then into his pockets at once."Well, I do. Your sister was never the woman to——""Take a dinner knife and slit her throat," concluded John-Andrew brutally. "I suppose she wasn't. Yes, she was out of her mind. The jury brought in a verdict of temporary insanity. I told you," proud self-justification stole into his voice, "that I was anxious about her. I told you and young Best and that fellow Branch. You remember?"He put his face close to Buttifant's, looking at him anxiously."Of course I remember.""Her letter to me, which I produced at the inquest. That proved the state of her mind. It was out of the question to suspect Mrs. Welfare.""Mrs. Welfare!" Buttifant actually laughed. "Have you got her still?""Yes, I've got her. I've got everything still. You must come and see.""I want to come and see.""I've got Jane's typewriter." John-Andrew had walked on ahead; he spoke now with his head turning slightly over his shoulder. "And the bell keeps ringing, Buttifant. Little silvery devil! Do you know it won't leave off."Buttifant jumped. Becca was right and there was something wrong with John-Andrew. Jane's bell! So that was why he had put his hands to his ears and why he was doing it now."I don't think you ought to have stayed on in Gray's Inn, old fellow," he said."Why not?" John-Andrew dropped back on his heels. "I've nothing to reproach myself with."His sly eyes met Buttifant's fair gaze. There was challenge in them and the most enormous pathos. Buttifant thought of Becca's eyes. How like they were to each other, she and John-Andrew!'The set in Gray's Inn," he was stubborn, "suits me very well; but it is odd," he paused, then re-peated wistfully, "that I can't get away from the ting of Jane's bell.""Nerves, only nerves. That is what I mean by saying you ought to get out of Gray's Inn. You are rich; you could afford something bigger, for one thing. And the change would do you good.""Quite big enough for me. And rich! What do you mean? I haven't got much.""You will have.Cackle Street by itself will make you a handsome competence. What luck! Most of us have to keep on until the last sickness steals behind and clubs us smartly on the head, knocking the ideas out.""Jane had to keep on; yet nobody clubbed her on the head or cut her throat," said John-Andrew. "An overdose of sleeping draught; they proved that at the inquest. As for being safe, you've got your water-colours. You won't need to do magazine work any more.""Perhaps not. But the water-colours are more a richness of the imagination than the pocket."They turned out of the cemetery. John-Andrew looked timidly along the high road at the stream of traffic. Then he huddled back."I've got an aunt buried in here somewhere," he said, looking behind him at the wide drive and the white tombstones. "Shall we go and look her up? Jane used to come to see that her grave was nicely kept. She made a little treat of it; had tea somewhere and rode home on the top of the 'bus.""No, no; come on." Buttifant took his arm. "Let us get back. Come with me to my club. We'll have a bit of dinner before I go to the theatre. Will you come with me? Or have you seenCackle Street too often?""Cackle Street! I tell you Jane could have written it. I don't want to see it again. Tomorrow I'll read yon the two acts of my new play. See what you think of that! There's a murder in it.""A murder! I didn't know melodrama——""Melodrama be hanged. I don't do things like other people. I don't want ready-made words tagged on to what I do. I was never a hack like you and Jane."Poor old John-Andrew! Yes, he bragged; he was worse than Gabriel Best."It is murder made mystic," he condescended to explain. "That's the strength and the confounded cunning of my idea. See?""I think I see?""I read the two acts to Branch last night. He was struck all of a heap. He hadn't a word to say. You should have seen his shiny old face! "John-Andrew laughed."The public likes a murder if only the author will drape it enough," he added.He was talking fast and walking fast; but his tongue and his legs were wavering. Buttifant said gently,"We can't walk all the way back to London. And must you go so fast?"He looked at John-Andrew's rapid irresolute legs."A walk will be nice," was the answer he got. "It's a beautiful day.""It may be beautiful out of London but here it is all grit and noise. Think what it must be like down in Cornwall, Vaguener. Why don't you go to St. Ives for a bit? The Marshalls want you; they told me to say so.""Yes, it's a privilege to have me. I'll write to Aunt Rebecca."John-Andrew said this, then went tearing on again."I can't keep up with you,"Buttifant panted, "I've been ill. I'm a poor rag of a thing still.""I'm sorry,"John-Andrew stopped dead, "but I only want to get out of all this clatter and rushing and ringing. Why don't you hail a cab, my good fellow?""You said it was a beautiful day and you wanted to walk, but here's a cab."Buttifant hailed a taxi; he impelled John-Andrew into it. He told the driver to take them to his club, which was in a street off the Embankment.It was a shabby exclusive club, with human homely ways. When they got there John-Andrew cuddled like a cat into a chair by the fire. He looked round him and said,"What a contrast to Jane's club! What a hell that tea-party of hers was! How the women screamed: with their voices and their frocks. I shan't forget that day."He shuddered."It's a comfortable club. You ought to join.""I've been asked to join a great many clubs. They all want me but I can't make up my mind. Branch belongs to this, doesn't he?""I believe he does.""And young Best?""Yes, Branch put him up, now I think of it. Seen anything of Best?""No—and heard nothing of him; which is better."John-Andrew sounded devilish. "He's no good. He'd better get back to his milk cans and cattle. He's a good-looking hind.""They were pretty little sketches, those Cornish things of his; they were the real thing. There is all sorts of work, of course,"said Buttifant."I'd like,"John-Andrew leaned forward, "there to be one sort of work—mine! I've got brain enough to keep the whole world amused with plays, novels, essays, poems—everything. But I haven't got the time.""Nonsense! You can't write all the plays and bill all the papers.""That is what I want."John-Andrew was dogged. "And I'd stop at nothing to get there. Look here, Buttifant, when anybody gets in my way I go like—that."He looked round, reached out and took a paper knife from the table near."Cut up their work."Buttifant soothed him. " You'll have to be a critic as well as a playwright. Now let's go and have some grub. Then I'll get off to seeCackle Street."They went in to dinner. John-Andrew ate very little; he was restless. Finally, he would not wait for coffee; he said he must get back to Gray's Inn and touch up those two acts. Buttifant had arranged to dine with him next day and afterwards to hear them read aloud.Coming on top of Cackle Street," John-Andrew shook hands with him violently and made off, "this new thing will hit you in the eye. And I read very well aloud. I read as well as I write."Before Buttifant started for the theatre, Branch came into the club. He at once asked the agent what he thought of Vaguener's new play.Branch sat down, he wiped the expanse of his great face.When he spoke it was with one word:"Rot! ""Oh—rot! "repeated Buttifant."Absolute—drivel! "Branch emphasised each word by padding his broad finger down on the table. "Vaguener,"he continued, "is a one-thing man. He's like young Best. They are very annoying, these people, they let the critics down. I would have put my money on Vaguener—after he brought me Cackle Street to place. Before that, while his poor little slave of a sister was alive and while he was comfortably sponging on her, I not only disliked him—that doesn't matter and I dislike him still—but I regarded him as the usual bumptious amateur. They make my life a misery and there are such lots of them. They are all geniuses—if only they had the time or if only they wanted the money.""John-Andrew wanted money in those days, badly enough,"said Buttifant."He did, poor gloomy little devil. Well now he's got it. Pity it didn't come while his sister lived; for I liked Miss Vaguener. She was worked out, and I hadn't the heart to tell her. I only hinted."Quiet Buttifant turned sick, he sat still. He could imagine the texture of Branch's hint! And Jane—not often sensitive—was exquisitely so when it came to Branch. No wonder she took two sleeping powders. Oh his love! His commonplace, inventive, loudvoiced love! With her noise and her heartiness and her sense of terror over money. If she were alive to-night, he could give her a lapful of money."When did you give her the hint?"he asked."The very night before she died. Don't you remember she dined with me? I've always been sorry—but I had to give her the tip for her own sake. I asked her out to dinner purposely. I put it as delicately as I could; and I'm pretty good at that sort of thing. Writers, of all grades, pass through my hands. And, by Jove, you have to handle them.""You were talking of Vaguener. You didn't believe there was anything in him?""I certainly did not. He used to bring me essays; decent things—so far as grammar went and so far as I could judge. But the public can do without grammar if you give it the real thing. The something else which is more than grammar.""AndCackle Street is—the real thing?""My dear chap! "Branch was enthusiastic, he talked fast and well. "It is marvellous. He's worked in all the commonplace things—the things we've got and can't do without, the things we like to see upon the stage and get out of Mudie's. Family life,Buttifant: making love, happy-ever-after—all that. Cackle Street might be one of his sister's serials. Yet there is something magic behind it. And something terrible too. Seen it?""No. I'm going to-night.""Take my advice and sit in the pit. Listen to what people say. They cry and they laugh and yet they can't make head nor tail of. it. They are wonderful creatures, these geniuses; full of surprises. But that
play—the thing Vaguener is on now—is idiotic. It is dull, improbable—impossible. I shall find some manager to stage it—because of Cackle Street. But after that, he's done. I doubt if it runs a couple of weeks. There's young Best again——""Yes, how about Best?""Coming the same cropper as Vaguener; only he won't have so far to fall. I don't worry about Best; he can turn to journalism. But Vaguener is different. I don't relish——""Giving him a hint,"concluded Buttifant, with a funny smile."Exactly. He's an uncertain sort of fellow. Well,"Branch took out his watch, "you ought to be off to seeCackle Street."So Buttifant went and he sat in the pit as he had been told to do. He was staggered by the genius of John-Andrew's play. Never had the family affections been more beautifully and more gaily, yet so terribly, portrayed. The genius and the mastery of it! He sat confused. He remembered those days in Gray's Inn, he remembered the funny terror of that set of Jane's after John-Andrew came. Underneath all the garish industry and solid eating there had been fantasy, promise and threat. It wasCackle Street. John-Andrew in his bedroom, his feet frozen and his head boiled by the fumes from his little oil stove, had been doing this!Jane had never suspected. She had gone on complacently with her fluent puerile stuff. What would Jane have said aboutCackle Street had she lived to see it produced, had she been sitting—now—here in the pit beside him?Jane would have shouted and giggled; she would certainly have cried. When they got back to Gray's Inn, she would have hugged John-Andrew, made him a cup of chocolate—and told him how to touch up Cackle Street here and there! She would ask him why on earth he didn't go to her for advice. She would shout out'Johnny!'Buttifant surmised this. He was quite off the track.A woman behind him was snuffling, she said, "I love the drama, but this tears your very heart strings out, don't it, Herbert?"Immediately after, came a gratified roar of pure mirth from another part of the house. John-Andrew could play tunes upon them all—any tune he liked. Yet you could imagine how sardonic he was throughout; making the audience pay for all his suffering. You felt the bitterness, the sexlessncss, the aloofness, all through the play: this—and some subtle unhinging of the mind.Buttifant came out of the theatre reeling in his feelings. John-Andrew had transformed him.He walked back to Holborn, but when he got to his hotel he walked by it and continued to Gray's Inn. The gate was shut. He would not ring up the porter and disturb John-Andrew, who was either asleep or hard at work. Yet to pass that portal was hard. He went on to Gray's Inn Road and, turning down, crossed the road. He walked slowly along, looking at the back windows of Grav's Inn. And he saw a light in the bedroom which used to be Jane's. Was John-Andrew sleeping there? Funny! For he could not stand noise. And—funny! For Jane had been found dead in that room. It was not a place for comfortable sleeping.CHAPTER XBUTTIFANT next day went early in the evening to Gray's Inn. This had been arranged, but—even not—he would have gone. He yearned to get near Jane: the Jane he knew—not that silent woman lying beneath his stiff lilies at Highgate.Jane was dead; yet at Gray's Inn she, in a sense and to him, still dwelt. Her things were there and the noisy spirit of her voice. He had lost her—and by death—which is the real loss: while the lost one lives, there are the quaint surprises of a freakish Fate to reckon with.To go up those stairs at Gray's Inn—dirty, old and dear—to stand upon the top landing and look at those two doors, made his heart sound like a hammer.He looked at his own oak, which was sported. A strange man's name was painted up.John-Andrew's oak was back and the brass knocker on the inner door was brightly polished, as it had been in Jane's time. Mrs. Welfare opened to him. Her face tilled with welcome. She said, simply,"Lor', Mr. Buttifant, you're a sight for sore eyes! "The sitting-room had not changed. Jane's odds and ends were still there; John-Andrew sat idle at her rolltop desk. Buttifant saw no sign of manuscript. John-Andrew's pose, John-Andrew's face when he turned round, looked as they had looked in Jane's time; in the pre-Cackle Street time when he had not a penny of his own; when he used to go marketing for Jane, with Jane's shabby old purse and her rush basket."It's only five,"said Buttifant. "You said six.""I'm glad you came early."John-Andrew looked affectionate, he seemed secure. "Sit down. She's cooking dinner for six o'clock; we can talk till then.""You'd have time to read me those two acts.""Two acts?""The play.""The play—yes. Did you go toCackle Street last night?""I did, it's—it's—Vaguener, it is supreme.""Supreme! That's the word I used to Jane. She didn't tell you?""She never mentioned your play. I didn't think she knew.""My play! "John-Andrew laughed, he left the rolltop desk and sat in the easy chair. "No, she didn't know."It was a warm evening in late March. There was no fire and the two easy chairs stood beneath one of the windows. This window was open and that insensible mournfulness of spring stole in. Buttifant looked white, John-Andrew looked yellow. They looked at each other, without further word they started smoking. The eloquence of this sitting here together after all that had happened since they sat here last, suggested itself and tied their tongues. They were two, when they should have been three. Buttifant was sitting in Jane's chair. He faced the mantelpiece, which was crowded with the cheap ornaments and freakish toys she used to pick up: of men selling on the kerbstone, from the Oriental department of the big drapers. John-Andrew had not moved anything."Let's talk," he said appealingly."I can't. We have so much to say." Buttifant's voice shook. 'You'd better start reading aloud. Afterwards, we shall get used to the place and each other.""I can't read on an empty stomach." John-Andrew's little laugh came quivering out from his throat. "I want to talk. I want to tell you things, Buttifant. What sort of life do you think I've lived here since she was murdered?"Murdered!""The word you used in the cemetery."So I did. You ought not to have stopped here. It has been too much for you."Buttifant looked at the yellowed face upon which the skin seemed stretched; he looked at the queer eyes and the round head covered so closely with satin-like hair that it seemed a cap."Well, Jane had this set on an agreement you see for three years and the things were here and where-ever I went these noises in my head would go on just the same," said John-Andrew, speaking breathlessly."What sort of noises?""Oh buzzing, humming, ringing. Bells! Her bell."'You don't use the typewriter? You write your stuff.""Yes, I write my stuff. But Cackle Street was typed.""You had it typed?""Yes, I had it typed."John-Andrew looked cunning; he picked at his trouser leg."Nice cloth!" he drew Buttifant's attention. "Jane wrote for patterns. I found them in the letterbox when I came back from her funeral. She wanted to choose the stuff, because she was going to pay, but she didn't.""Of course not."Buttifant felt increasingly uneasy."So I chose it myself—you may be sure Jane wouldn't have chosen it. She would have dressed me in something green, with a check. I've had a devil of a time, Buttifant." John-Andrew dropped his voice and looked towards the door.Mrs. Welfare was frying and they smelt it."I'm sure you have. I've often thought of you and wondered.""Where have you been all these months? You might have looked me up.""I've been in Cornwall. Commander Attfield and my mother are there. They are building a house at Carbis Bay. And I've been ill. You heard that?""Yes, I heard. Becca wrote. Once a week she used to write but I never answered, so she left off."John-Andrew sounded disdainful. Poor little Becca!"What was the matter with you, Buttifant?""Tried my eyes too much. I've got glasses now, so it's all right. You don't look very fit.""I'm remarkably well, thank you; never was better." John-Andrew's answer was prompt. "I was telling you about the time I've had here. Bad enough since Jane died, but infernal while she was alive. She—she"—he suddenly turned piteous, so piteous that Buttifant's swift anger with him died—" rubbed it in, old fellow.""That was only her way. She never meant it.""And I couldn't make a penny. I couldn't even pay for the washing of my own shirt. I kept taking things to Mr. Branch—good stuff—and he kept grinning. And——''"But you were doing Cackle Street?""Cackle Street! Yes. But that came later on.""It didn't take you long to write?""Oh no time. Afternoon of one day, morning of the next——""What! Cackle Street! A play—in half a day! My dear fellow."'The idea, the idea, I mean." John-Andrew was eager."Ideas! Yes, they can come while you're fastening your collar. It is the working out I mean.""Yes, the working out; that's a grind. I used to get up early in the morning. But I'd rather talk about Jane. Wouldn't you?""That depends." Buttifant's small figure looked rigid."She used to gossip to Mrs. Welfare, you know, about me. It wasn't kind. Old Mother Welfare's insolence——""I wonder you've kept her.""Well! There she was, you know. She comes more than she did in Jane's time. She comes to cook dinner at night.""You can afford it." Buttifant was bitter."Oh I can afford it." John-Andrew was sleek."And then," he continued, "Jane talked against me to you.""Never, never. You do us—you do her—a wrong.""I don't expect you to give her away." John-Andrew glared. "Why should you? And what does it matter? It is all over. But if you knew what I suffered." He put up his hands to his ears, he jerked them down and folded them simply on his crossed knees. "I should never have done what I did, Jane you know—if I had only gone away just for one week-end, to think things out. That might have saved me. It was touch and go with me at that time. But I couldn't go without asking Jane for the money.""You did do what you did—Cackle Street," Buttifant soothed him," by suffering.—We do.""Do?""Good work! Cackle Street It was because you suffered.""Yes, yes; she suffered too. Jane I mean.""In her way. Yes, she used to get afraid," Buttifant's sweet voice ran round the panelled walls in pure music," but it did not wring good work out of her. It only produced the bad and popular."Mrs. Welfare came in to lay the cloth; she was looking at John-Andrew covertly and trying to catch Buttifant's eye. She went out again. She had been slow laying the cloth."That's the way she always lays the cloth," said John-Andrew, whispering, " and the way she used to lay it when Jane was ill in bed that time."Mrs. Welfare returned."Be sure you put enough knives on the table, Mrs. Welfare. Last night I had to ring for an extra one."Vaguener speaking, stood up."Have you taken the hot water into my room?" he added."Yes, sir.""And some for Mr. Buttifant? You'd like to wash your hands, old fellow? I can't manage to keep mine clean.""No, thanks," said Buttifant, looking at his fingers.John-Andrew went out, leaving him alone with Mrs. Welfare.She put the plate-basket down and said, jerking her head towards the bedroom that used to be Jane's:"Hear him washing his hands? He does that all day long. I'm always putting shillings in the gas`meter through hotting up so much water.""Washes his hands all day long! Why?""That's it!" Mrs. Welfare nodded. "Why? If I ask Mr. Welfare that question once of a evening I ask it twenty times. And Mr. Welfare's got but one answer—blood!""Blood! Good gracious!"Buttifant looked at her. Faint smiles played across his quietly expressionless face. Melodrama amused him and Mrs. Welfare was the exponent of it. She always had been. Jane—who had no pride, of the exclusive sort—used to try plots on Mrs. Welfare.If Mrs. Welfare said, 'Lor', Miss Vaguener, what notions you do get,' Jane knew it was all right."I thought at first, I did indeed," Mrs. Welfare came up very close to Buttifant and the savoury hot smell of the food she had cooked blew out from her, " that he'd done it.""Done what?""Put her out of the way, poor soul. I said so—I as good as said so that day when I went off for the doctor. You know, Mr. Buttifant. That morning when she was found dead and you was took bad and your Ma came. I didn't care what I said; for I felt so sure.""You thought Mr. Vaguener had killed his sister, Mrs. Welfare?""I did, sir. I never trust them dark-complexioned men. Mr. Welfare's a blond.""So am I."Buttifant was still amused."I suppose you are, sir."Mrs. Welfare, insensibly, was disparaging as she stared into Buttifant's well-bred vacuity."Mr. Welfare's a fine man," she said. "Well, I thought, between ourselves, Mr. Buttifant, that he'd tried to do you both in. Poison! That was my idea as I went down them stairs that morning.""But why? It's a dangerous thing to say.""That's Mr. Welfare's way. 'You shut up,' he says. 'That's libel and libel's a dangerous thing.' Men, if you'll excuse me, Mr. Buttifant, haven't got a ha'porth of imagination.""Very likely not. What do you make of Cackle Street? Seen it? There's a man's imagination, Mrs. Welfare."John-Andrew washing his hands in Jane's room—washing them hard—could be heard through the wall. Mrs. Welfare listened."He ain't nearly done yet," she said, "I know him. When he's done, he pours away the water. Of course I've seen his play. He ses to me, when it first come out, 'Go as often as you damned like, Mrs. Welfare.' His words, Mr. Buttifant, not mine, if you'll excuse me. So me and Mr. Welfare gets passed into the stalls. Ain't it wonderful, Mr. Buttifant! To think of all that coming out of his little noddle. No wonder he was so beastly to me through all them months when she was alive. It accounts for everything."'You don't think he's a murderer then?""Not now I don't. I think it was the strain, Mr. Buttifant."She was impressive, she was dignified: as if John-Andrew's brilliance conferred a ray on her."How he could think of it and work it out that way beats me. And it's true to life, mind you. Seen it?""Yes. I saw it last night.""Did you now? Don't it make your flesh creep? And yet at one part I laughed till I thought my spine would crack. Oh he's got a wonderful brain. You can't deny that. Mind you, I don't like him and I never shall like him, but I don't deny his brain.""No, I wouldn't." Buttifant was gentle."But when all's said and done, I ham a lady, Mr, Buttifant, and that stand-off way of his gets on my nerves. He kind of looks over you, if you understand my way of speaking.""I do understand—and that is his way. Don't take any notice of him.""All the same, he wants looking after, mind you. And my heart often bleeds for him."Mrs. Welfare looked genuinely concerned."I'm sorry for the poor little chap. You can't help feeling sorry, although he makes you mad. There's something about him which his sister hadn't got. I never felt sorry for Miss Vaguener; not in my heart. And I've got a warm heart. I felt savage because she was so put upon, but I can't say I was sorry.""Weren't you? " Buttifant was thinking of Jane who had never evoked anything in any heart—but his!"He wants," Mrs. Welfare returned to John-Andrew," feeding up and properly looking after. Pity he hasn't got a wife—though if he had, God help her! I wouldn't marry him, not if I was free, not if he went on his knees. I can't stand your cold-tempered man.""I don't think he's likely to have a wife, Mrs. Welfare.""No more don't I. But he'll break down sooner or later. You see. I wouldn't be surprised at any-thing what happened. He ought to be taken out of this and put to bed and fed up. That's what they do with 'em nowadays. He'll do himself a mischief else and that's my honest opinion. I'd never be surprised to come in some fine morning and find him hanging behind the door. And it's a load off my mind to speak to you, Mr. Buttifant. His brain—you mark what I say—won't stand much more. Brains go out on strike, like everything else. Why I come out of the theatre every time I see his play, feeling a different woman—and that can't be wholesome, can it? If I feel like that just lolling in the stalls, what did the making of it all up mean to him? And I'll slip back to the kitchen for—hark at him—he's pouring the water away."She hurried out as John-Andrew slid in. Ten minutes later she brought in the dinner."Don't stay to wash up, Mrs. Welfare." John-Andrew was suave when she came in to clear away. "I want to talk to Mr. Buttifant.""Well, I don't wash up at the keyhole, Mr. Vaguener, but I'll go home if you like. Mr. Welfare will be grateful."She went off; in a fusillade of slamming doors. John-Andrew breathed hard."It's such a relief to get rid of that woman, Buttifant." He slouched from the table to the easy chair and took out his cigarette-case." Do you remember when you kept me in Turkish cigarettes? How decent of you!''They sat smoking. John-Andrew looked fretfully at his lingers. "I hate dirty hands," he said. "They make me most unhappy. That brown stain might be dried blood and it's only tobacco. I hate blood. I'm afraid of cutting myself when I shave."Buttifant was looking at Jane's desk and the shining cover of her typewriter. John-Andrew followed his glance."Don't think I use the typewriter," he said irritably, "I told you I didn't. And all the papers are in her desk just as she left them. There are a deuce of a lot of notebooks. I don't know what to do with them. None of it any good to me of course."His tone was superior. Buttifant reddened. He looked at him and he could understand what Mrs. Welfare meant; about resenting John-Andrew and yet feeling pitiful."Jane was no good to me," John-Andrew continued."And yet how good she was!" burst out Buttifant."Yes, wasn't she?" John-Andrew was hearty. "Yet our life together here was a perfect hell. It was to me. I don't know what Jane felt. I hated Jane—one of those native hates of soul for soul which you can't drive out, or dig in. There it is! Yet I lived on her earnings. I was worse than a prostitute. You know the sort of name they've got for men like me.""Well, it's over, it's over, old man.""Yes—over. But what a way to get it over. And it was the only way. No other way out for me. Something devilish pointing a finger! What a signpost! This way out, it said."He lighted another cigarette. Slipping down in the big chair, he smoked hard."There's nothing I can do for Jane—to make up," he spoke more quietly. "I did try while she was alive. Do you remember that violet frock I bought at Peter Robinson's? It's hanging up still. And the shoes to match are under the bed. I've told Mrs. Welfare she'll get sacked if she alters a thing in Jane's room.""But you sleep there.""How do you know that?""I concluded. I saw a light there late last night.you went in there to wash your hands just now.""Yes, I sleep there. It's more—companionable than that." He pointed to the door leading into the bedroom he had occupied in Jane's life. "Also that room," still pointing," is mixed up in my mind with countless horrors. I worked there that winter you know—when she was alive.""You wrote Cackle Street there. Remember that.""Yes—Cackle Street"A soft laugh came from the big chair down which John-Andrew kept slipping."The monotony of our lives—Jane's life and mine! The hopelessness and desperation! And then, Buttifant, the noises these old rooms make! Not only the sound of Jane's bell, but the spirits of the sounds that dead men make. Think of the men that have lived and died in these rooms. All sorts of sins, I'll swear. Hey? Murder would be nothing. Very often you can justify murder.""Dangerous ethics," said Buttifant and looked hard at him.Mrs. Welfare was right. John-Andrew was on the edge. He must be got away. But how? Buttifant thought of Becca in Cornwall. He had promised to write. What could he say?"There's one thing I might do for Jane." John-Andrew was thoughtful. "It occurred to me when I was washing my hands. I didn't mention it at dinner, I didn't want Mrs. Welfare to hear. What do you say to taking away that cross on the grave and putting up a regular monument? Something swagger. Something people would stop to stare at. You can get them at that place near Great Portland Street. I go in and talk to the chap sometimes. I'll get an estimate from him to-morrow. Something handsome in white marble—or would Jane rather have pink granite? What do you think? She loved expense, poor girl. I think a really striking tombstone is her right. It's her share. I don't mean just a stone but an effigy, an angel—something emblematic. By George! You could design it."Buttifant never answered. He could not.John-Andrew did not mind, he did not notice. He kept on lighting one cigarette after another. At last he shot up, getting to his feet suddenly."Come and see Jane's frocks. Advise me what to do. I can't give them to Mrs. Welfare.""Jane's things to that woman! No."Buttifant said this and stood up."I could send to a wardrobe shop and have them fetched away. Come and have a look."John-Andrew started off to Jane's room. Buttifant followed, in that sacred hush of the mind which a man feels when he loves a woman and comes intimately near her possessions. He was shaking; his white, still face looked blotched."You see she never had a woman friend." John-Andrew opened the bedroom door. "There is your mother. She likes clothes; she is a good sort. Can't she——?""My mother is not the one. You must send for Mrs. Marshall.""Aunt Rebecca! I can't be bothered with them. Becca would make love and Kenneth would pray."A curtain hung over the recess in which Jane's things hung. John-Andrew drew it back."There you are! Now what am I to do with all those suicides? Don't they look like dead women hanging there?"Buttifant looked helplessly round him; not only at dresses but at all the fal-lals and all the popular refinements which had been Jane's. Nothing had been moved—Jane's things they rived his heart."You must have it all taken away," he said resolutely." And you must come away from the place yourself. I'll take you off to Cornwall to-morrow morning."No, you won't." John-Andrew was lingering Jane's frocks." I must finish my play. Very soon my public will be gaping for it. The public, with a throat like a young thrush, wants my long worm. In my play—come back to the sitting-room and I'll read those two acts—I've got a murder. I made the man do it with a knife. Quite a naked blunt crime. Bold stroke isn't it—a knife? I've done it in the most brutal, police-court way. Yet I've carried it through safely and the play isn't spoiled as a work of art. I'd like to know what you think." He sounded dreadfully anxious. "I could see that Branch was impressed. It took his breath away."Buttifant stood by the open door. John-Andrew crouching more into the recess, enfolding himself in Jane's dead dresses, looked distraught."There are so many ways of murdering," he continued," and I had no time to think it over—to sleep on it I mean. The impulse came suddenly; the necessity asserted itself. To write the play I mean. You understand? For I must have something to follow, hot, on Cackle Street. I might have made it poison—but that is stagy. I wanted to be original and I was: not original in my mode, because a knife is the commonest way, but in my method. I wanted to be strong. There isn't anything more strong or more simple than cutting a woman's throat."He left Jane's dresses. He had pushed past Buttifant and got into the little passage. His hat hung on a peg round the corner. He jammed it well down on his smooth head."I'm going out to get an evening paper," he said."An evening paper." Buttifant pulled one from his pocket." Here you are. An early edition—but there's nothing in the papers just now.""There isn't." John-Andrew turned round by the outer door which he held open." We want something to wake us up. We want a sensation. A murder—or——""You've got a murder in your play. Come and read those acts to me."Buttifant went close to him.'Don't stop me." John-Andrew's voice was quiet, he put out his thin brown hands. "Let me go and get an evening paper."He swung round, went out and slammed the door behind him.Buttifant stood alone—with Jane! He was alone in this place where she had worked and where she had killed herself. He went back into her bedroom, he drifted to her mute gowns on the hooks. He patted them. They were so lonely, so empty. Each one, neat upon a coat hanger, looked like a lean woman. Jane had been so plump! Such warmth and noise to Jane.He stood still, but only for a few seconds. Then he was recalled to the necessity of looking after John-Andrew. He put on his own hat and hurried out of the set.He raced down the stairs and into South Square.John-Andrew must have taken the stairs slowly, because he was only just going under the archway into Gray's Inn Square.Buttifant followed; close up and carefully. He felt there was no need for carefulness. John-Andrew—by his narrow shoulders, by his fixed sleek head—expressed absorption. His legs hurried across Gray's Inn Square—taking it diagonally, going towards the other little archway which led to Verulam Buildings: his spirit was a long way off.They went along Verulam Buildings; John-Andrew walking at a steady trot, Buttifant behind. Over the railing was the spring traffic, the dust, the noise, the sulky, goldy glitter of the spring evening and the London street.John-Andrew turned into the street. He went towards the police station at the corner. Buttifant followed.CHAPTER XITHEY went into the police station; Buttifant eager, the composure of his face stirred; John-Andrew set, yet oblivious.Together they breathed the naked official airs of the place.A policeman was sitting at a thick yellow table, highly varnished and having upon it a book, a pen, a blotting pad and a great dirty glass inkpot.John-Andrew stepped briskly up to this table, holding his hands behind him. He said to the observant policeman, as if he said a lesson, "I am John-Andrew Vaguener, the famous playwright. You of course know my name. I wish to give myself up for a murder. I murdered my sister Jane in South Square. We lived together and I cut her throat with a knife, I took it out of the box in the kitchen. She was in bed at the time but wide awake. She saw me do it."He shot his hands out straight before him."I suppose you've got handcuffs here," he added simply.Buttifant came forward, taking him by the arm. John-Andrew turned his head, looking blank. There was nothing in his eyes; any more than there had been in Jane's.He stared, then he collapsed and folding his hands between his knees, dropped into a chair that was by the table.He covered his face. The policeman and Buttifant heard him crying violently."Fit to break his heart," whispered the policeman, as if John-Andrew were a baby."It's all right," Buttifant whispered back. "He is John-Andrew Vaguener and——""The chap who wrote Cackle Street, sir? Yes, I knew him at once. I've seen his photo in the papers. And it ain't a face you can forget, no more you can't the play. You should hear my missus on that play!"The policeman stood over John-Andrew, looking at him curiously as he sat there crying, his jerky brown hands, with their air of strength, covering his face."A nervous breakdown," continued Buttifant, still whispering. "His sister took an overdose of sleeping stuff in South Square. There was an inquest. Dr. Graham from Woburn Square was called in.""Yes, yes," the policeman suddenly became stolid and rubbed his chin. "You'll leave your name?""Of course—Buttifant. I'm staying at the First Avenue Hotel, but you'd find me with Mr. Vaguener at 6 South Square for the next few days. I'll take him back there now.""Mr. Grattan off Torrington Square is the medical gent for that sort of case, sir. Brings 'em round wonderful.""Thanks, but I shall call in Dr. Graham who was sent for when Miss Vaguener died. Good night, officer." Buttifant touched John Andrew."Come along," he said cheerfully. "We'll get back.""Like a cab, sir?""Yes, I think a cab," Buttifant smiled affably into the official's broad pink face, stamped suddenly with official suspicion. The policeman believed every word that Buttifant said; he had recognised John-Andrew and he did not believe him. At the same time, the sense of his profession was strong."They'll follow the cab. You see?" said John-Andrew quite in his natural voice as they drove away. "If they won't believe me I can't help that can I? I've done my duty. I went and gave myself up for murdering Jane. I was willing to pay the penalty, but if they won't hang me—well, they won't."He cuddled back on the seat."Don't think about it," said Buttifant."I have thought a lot. I've written it all out—the way I did it you know.""In your play? Of course. I see.""Play! I've put it all down in diary form. If they'd hanged me, you might have edited the thing and got it published. What a scoop for Branch! But they're not going to hang me, so I shall burn it."When the cab stopped in South Square he seemed half asleep. Buttifant helped him out; they went slowly up the stairs. When they got to the top landing they found Branch there."I was just going away," he said. "The oak wasn't sported so I thought you must be in, Vaguener. I've been knocking for ten minutes and more."John-Andrew laughed."I just stepped round to the police station to give myself up for murder. I murdered Jane but the fool of a policeman won't believe it. I should like," he turned peevishly to Buttifant, "to get to bed. I haven't slept properly for weeks. Can't you get me to bed? Open the door. Here's the key." He brought it out.Buttifant opened the door; he led John-Andrew along the passage. He said to Branch, who followed them, "Go into the sitting-room."Branch nodded; his large flat-looking blue eyes seemed starting out of his head. For he believed John-Andrew."Are you going to stay?" asked John-Andrew sleepily; his smooth head ducking and diving into the pillows, directly he was got to bed."Of course. You get off to sleep."When Buttifant entered the sitting-room, Branch was walking about; in steps of quick excited soft-ness.""I say, Buttifant, what a development If he really did murder that poor girl. What a sensation! It's just the sort of thing he might do.""Of course he didn't." Buttifant was cool. "We know it was sleeping powders. He's off his head, Branch, for the time being. Can't you see that? He's had more than he can stand.""Miss Vaguener stood the racket; he didn't," returned Branch, staring still and speaking coldly—for he hated John-Andrew. "A man who can live on a woman as he did must be pretty blunt, don't you think?""I suppose he's a genius isn't he? We don't measure them by the same foot rule, do we?" Buttifant asked these questions quietly."Hanged if I know what genius is." Branch dropped heavily down in the chair which once was Jane's."Don't sit down," Buttifant, small, composed, compact, and smiling, stood over him, "I've got a job for you.""Job! What?""Go to Woburn Square and see if Dr. Graham is in. If he is, send him round. We're going to have trouble with Vaguener.""Think so!" Branch stood up at once. "All right. I'll go."He turned round at the outer door."You're a good fellow, Buttifant.""Good! Why? What's happened?""Nothing—but a good sort!" Branch shook his fat shoulders. "A genius too in your way—but no confounded airs! I was awfully glad about those water-colours, you know. I always knew you would. I can spot that sort of thing at once.""Yes, I was glad," Buttifant returned the warmth of the agent's hand grip, "but you don't always spot. How about John-Andrew?""I'll take a bet that you'll go farther than either he or Best. There's no stay to them. One book, one play! What's the good of that?"Branch, a heavy man, went off deliberately down-stairs. Buttifant leaned over the top of the landing:"Send him along as quick as you can—the doctor.""Of course I will. Good night. I'll look in to-morrow to see how Vaguener is. Don't suppose it's much; he'll sleep it off.""Good gracious, Branch, he is not drunk."Branch did not answer. His heavy tread continued—at the same pace.Buttifant stood upon the landing. How quiet it was in there—in Jane's set! He looked through the open door to the end of the passage.In that other set of chambers across the landing which once was his, he could hear a woman laughing. How she laughed! And wasn't she happy? He had a heart for women.Shut in there in Jane's room, burrowing in her bed, was John-Andrew. He probably was fast asleep by now.When he woke up? Would he have forgotten about the police station and his ghastly yarn of a knife to Jane's throat? 'Buttifant's sense of composition was strong upon him and he thought, that, artistically, John-Andrew, lying there upon Jane's bed, should have taken too many sleeping powders, gone to sleep and never awakened. He should have died as Jane died.That would be dramatic; it would be in keeping with Cackle Street.John Andrew had done his marvellous one work. He would do no more. He would only cut sorry capers. Branch had said so and Branch always knew.Gabriel Best was different. He was of a lighter literary build and could gyrate. John-Andrew was inflexible. If he failed—after so amply succeeding—he would end by cutting his own throat or somebody else's.Buttifant, looking at Jane's door, trembled for the future.Much better if John-Andrew went out now, in a blaze of imaginative glory. If he went now, he stood to be a classic.But—no! He would not. Buttifant knew too much about the foolish, inevitable anti-climax of Life. John-Andrew would go on living. He would write drivelling plays, become insufferable, make a violent end.Doctor Graham came that night. He was a Scotchman, with a bald, domed head and a dry manner. The very sight of him revived in Buttifant the strangeness of his own sickness; when he had spun upon the landing that morning when Jane died."You're looking all right now." The doctor shook hands with him. "Glasses suit?""Admirably, thanks.""You've made a name for yourself since I saw you last." The Scotchman spoke with the usual kindly patronage; he meant well; he had an idea that he was being complimentary.It was a manner, so Buttifant resentfully felt, of dealing with some odd sect. He felt that he was regarded as belonging—in a non-religious sense—to the Peculiar people. The bland interest which persons like this Scotch doctor and good Mrs. Marshall took in what they imposingly called "his work" filled him with helpless violences."Have I?" He was off-hand."My dear fellow," the doctor laughed amiably," don't be too modest. I've been to see those water-colours. Lots of people went; they were spoken very well of. I took my daughter. She paints, she thought them quite good. I congratulate you. It must be more satisfactory than doing pictures for the papers.""It is." Buttifant was more limp and more distant. "I wanted you to see Vaguener. He's got a sort of nervous breakdown and thinks he murdered his sister Jane. He went to the police station and tried to give himself up for cutting her throat.""Dear, dear! What an extraordinary notion. We must get that out of his head. Where is he?""In bed. I'll take you to him."They found John-Andrew wide awake. He had in his eyes that dead look which told nothing. He would not speak; he passively allowed the doctor to pummel him."He must be taken off to a Nursing Home," said the doctor when he returned with Buttifant to the sitting-room." Get him out of this; he never ought to have stayed here after his sister died. What were his people thinking of to let him? ''"He isn't influenced by his people.""I suppose not. Great pity, great pity; that you clever folk can't be like everybody else. Of course he's had the strain of that play. Clever bit of work, Cackle Street. I flatter myself that, if I hadn't been a doctor, I could have done well as a dramatist. I never miss a good thing at the theatres. You've seen it of course. Remarkably clever isn't it?"'Yes, I've seen it. Awfully clever. Where are you going to send him to, doctor?""Street off Bryanston Square. I'll give you the name and address. I'll telephone the Matron. He mustn't see anybody, not even relatives, for some time, remember.""Relatives are the last people he'd want to see."Buttifant smiled when he said this; for he thought of Becca. What a passionate child she was, with her flaming hair and her long, lovely, immature limbs!"I suppose he's that sort." The doctor's laugh was amused. "These artistic people! They don't seem to have any natural feeling. Great pity, great pity!""You get the advantage of their natural feeling when you go to the theatre, doctor.""I suppose that's it." The doctor looked thought-fully at Buttifant's impassive pallor. "Only a certain amount of nervous force to expend in all of us. I hadn't looked at it in that light before. We'll get him away to the Nursing Home. Bed, no visitors, constant feeding. He'll be all right.""You think he'll get rid of this delusion?""About murdering his sister? Of course he will. These cases are simple; it is only a matter of time and rest."The doctor went off and a couple of hours later John-Andrew was taken to the Nursing Home.Mrs. Welfare was washing up. He called to her blandly through the open kitchen door."They've come to fetch me away you see. Hanging' s too good for a man like me, isn't it? They've nabbed me, Mrs. Welfare."He laughed. When he and Buttifant had driven out of the Square, Mrs. Welfare went into Jane's bedroom, opened the window and set the bed to air. Then—feeling herself complete mistress at last—she poked about in the recess amongst Jane's dresses. She opened drawers and helped herself to a lace collar; she appropriated a pot of cream upon the wash-stand.Buttifant came back to South Square with John-Andrew's key in his pocket. He opened the door. Mrs. Welfare, thank Heaven, had gone home. He was in no mood for her rough philosophy.This set of chambers, once Jane's, was now his for as long as he chose. John-Andrew had begged him to look after things. If he liked, he could stay there while John-Andrew was in the Nursing Home; and that would be weeks. But he knew that his mother would not allow it; she would come and—imperiously tender—dig him out.He was safe for a few days. He could take a cherished pause: the lonely halt that heals us! He could live in limpness of mind, in luxury of soul. He could dwell with his own grief and fear no intrusion.He sported the oak. How alone he was! For sheer solitude nothing could compare with these four rooms in the quiet Square. Four rooms with a thick outer door; to keep the prying world away. He set about making himself comfortable in the tidy, old-bachelor way that he had known in the set across the landing. With sorrow, with a sacred guilty feeling of invading Jane's sanctity, he found the drawer where she had kept house linen and helped himself to sheets and towels. He made up his bed in the room leading out of the sitting-room; the place where John-Andrew—as everyone believed—had written Cackle Street.Later in the day, he went round to the First Avenue Hotel, paid his bill and brought away his luggage.He settled down in eloquence and sorrow and a strange, stilled peace. He could hear Jane and see her; he talked to her; he said to her things which, in life, he had not said. He seemed to touch her solid flesh.Throughout, he severely kept his sense of sanity. He knew that to do this sort of thing for long would be morbid and might become dangerous. He might find himself—as John-Andrew found himself—in a Nursing Home at several guineas a week. A caustic smile drifted over his calm face. John-Andrew could afford to pay and so could he. How things had changed, since Jane slaved in this set of chambers.He never meant to come to a Nursing Home. He would not be spoon-fed. But he would give himself a little while: to realise his love for Jane; to make a record of her, to recall every little darling noisy incident of her life here; to think of those evenings when she used to make chocolate for him and John-Andrew and brag about the work she had done that day. He wanted to imagine her in her violet frock and hear her brag about her complexion. His boastful, crude and precious Jane! Why had he loved her? Oh—he did! Yet, consumed by passion, he preserved his sense of poise.When he lay in bed; awake and with the moon—for he chose to have it that way—coming through the window with the dragged-back curtain—he could hear homelv warm merriment in the room through the wall; the room in the set which once had been his. She had a pretty laugh, that girl in his old chambers.And she was pretty to look at. Once or twice he met her on the landing or he saw her cross the Square with a market basket. She went shopping in the mornings, as Jane used to shop. She was a Japanesy-looking girl, with heaps of fine dark hair, a white face and a new thick wedding-ring. He noticed that she flaunted that ring. It might have been legitimate pride. Or she might have had some other reason.At night, he often heard her kick off her shoes. They were little shoes—somehow, he could tell that by the sound. And he could see her doing it. For he loved love and understood its little ways.Jane never had any coquettish atmosphere; she only had conceit.His calm days went on. He saw no one and did nothing. Each morning he called primly at the Nursing Home, enquired after John-Andrew, left a bunch of flowers, then walked back to Gray's Inn, through the bright sunshine and the busy people.He knew he ought to write to Becca, he knew he ought to write to his mother. But he was in blissful suspension; each day he said, "I will write tomorrow."One morning at the end of the second week he heard a hammering at the oak. He let the person—wherever it was—bang away for a good ten minutes; then, feeling jarred, feeling sneakish, he went along the passage. He supposed it was Branch; and he didn't want to see Branch's fat round face.But when he opened the two doors he saw Becca."Oh, Mr. Buttifant! It's you is it?" she said and walked in. She turned into the sitting-room.She said, looking round her,"Where is Johnny?"Buttifant told her all about it."You didn't keep your word with me. You didn't write. But I forgive you." She glanced at him. "You've been living here and thinking of Jane."Buttifant nodded."Very bad—if you do it too long." Becca was curt. "Very good—for a little while.""That is what I felt. How wise you are.""We've learned out of the same lesson-book," said Becca. "I don't blame you for taking a little time to yourself. I should have done. But it is over now, Mr. Buttifant. Your mother is in London; they've come up to Bedford Square and I'm staying with them."She laughed in a wicked way, adding:"I don't know what my mother will say when she comes back from Bodiam. She's gone to study
embroidery and she left me in charge of the servants, her Orpington pullets and Kenneth. But you didn't write and I couldn't bear any more anxiety about John-Andrew, so I just went down to Barnoon the day before yesterday and told——""My mother? How wise. I'm glad you did. She'd understand.""I didn't. I told Commander Attfield; he under-stood. He's got that lunacy about your mother that you had for Jane and I have for John-Andrew. We won't," Becca's thick scarlet mouth twisted in contempt for the populace, "call it love—because every-one thinks they've been in love some time or the other. No they don't though; Mother never pretends she was in love with father.""You told the Commander? Dear old thing! What did he do?""Yes, isn't he a dear old thing? Do! He just persuaded your mother to come to London for new clothes and then he said I looked as if I wanted a change. Your mother was sweet. She at once suggested my coming to stay in Bedford Square and you may be sure I jumped at her invitation.""Did your brother mind?""I don't know. Did I tell him? Let me see. No, I didn't; he was out visiting, so I left word with Cook. Kenneth is all tonsure and no flesh; he won't care. He'll be relieved, I'm too bracing for him. Now we'll go off to Johnny.""No we won't. He mustn't sec a soul. He'll be shut up there for weeks.""Sounds like a lunatic asylum.""In a polite way I suppose it is.""But will he get quite well? Will he get rid of the awful idea that he murdered Jane?""Absolutely, so the doctor says. Only a matter of time.""Your poor mother has got to keep me all that time." Becca looked droll, yet on the point of crying. "For nothing will make me go back to Cornwall till I've seen him, till," her little petal-like eyes blazed and so did her cheeks, "I've got him. You see?""I see." Buttifant looked at her. A curious shy glow overspread them.Here, in the quiet room of Jane's set, they sat; loving Jane, loving John-Andrew; in queer sympathy with each other.The reflection came to Buttifant—wouldn't Jane have shouted—had she read their two hearts now!"Of course you do." Becca dropped her eyes, she fumbled her hands across the table and Buttifant taking them, squeezed them hard.He drank, he delighted; in her candour and her vividness: that colour of nature which is a bigger asset to a woman than mere beauty. Becca was so decorative; outside and in. The artist in him was ravished by her. Yet she was not—to his heart—worth Jane's little finger-nail. She was not worth one hearty shout of Jane's or one cheap garment—atrociously put on!Jane, stiff under those lilies of his that by now had gone brown, held his heart for all his life. Jane—so plebeian, so grating, so good! Jane who, almost wholly, was component with her inn-keeping grand-mother; in Switzerland or somewhere. What a funny thing love was!There was no fine streak in Jane; there was only a pathos born of hard circumstance. He would always believe this. He would never know that the germ of his love for Jane lay in her power to write Cackle Street. He believed as the world believed, that this astonishing drama had come out of John-Andrew. Whereas, all that John-Andrew had done was to pedantically alter a bit of his sister's dialogue here and there.Lines—not many—that the critics had complained of—were John-Andrew's lines, not Jane's. They represented his sole output inCackle Street. They were scholarly, correctly, dead—and out of all joint with the play."We'd better go to Bedford Square," said Buttifant, standing up."Yes, we'd better." Becca stood up too.They were close together, they understood each other so well, they were so constitutionally kin of colour and texture, that he felt they should have merged.John-Andrew and Jane stood coldly between."No artist," thought Buttifant, going down the stairs and revelling in Becca's youthful gaudiness, "ever marries a decorative woman. If I had married Jane—(God bless you, Jane!)—how pasty she would have been in middle age. Think of Jane's hair going grey when the time came! What a sandy muddle!CHAPTER XIIJOHN-ANDREW lay for weeks in the Nursing Home, seeing no one but the doctor and the nurses; hearing nothing, caring nothing. The outside world had become trivial; he only knew that he was tired and comfortable. He never wished to leave this place. Contact—with things or with other bodies—was too painful a speculation.He was content to lie in the bed; without a book, or a letter, or a paper, or the littlest whisper from outside. He did not even care to assert himself as the author of Cackle Street. Probably the nurses considered him quite an obscure person! What did that matter so long as he had his milk, his beef juices and his beaten eggs! He approached his many little meals in the spirit of the true ritualist.His active life—as it had been—receded. It went far out and he half-forgot everything. He was dull over his torture during Jane's life and dull over his freedom since she died. His life that was past lay as a grey line—thin, uniform: it was as the sea—on a flat shore at low tide. He could not believe that the tide would come in again, that waves would be big.He wished to stay idle here for the rest of his life, just being soothed and fed and tended; just weakly, warmly sleeping, just hearing, but only as a silky muffle, the traffic of the London streets. How good of Buttifant to get him here!"This is a quiet situation," he said in a complimentary voice to his nurse one day," but why do they ring the church bell so often? A funeral bell isn't it? It might depress some patients, but I have nothing to feel afraid of."The nurse smiled. Presently she gave him something warm, in a fine thin cup, to drink. Then he went to sleep.The bell annoyed him for a week or two—then they left off ringing it. (There had been no bellringing—except to his ears.) He was glad not to hear it any more; since bells reminded him of Jane's typewriter. But he was not inordinately glad; for he torpidly accepted things as they came or went. He took them for granted. Nothing could hurt him here.After a week or two more he began to think; he was vaguely alive to facts and vaguely uneasy. He had made a fool of himself at the police station, for of course he didn't cut Jane's throat. He had meant to; he was there with the knife, but Jane was awake instead of being asleep. That made all the difference.He did not bother about it again that day or the next. Then he began to think faster. Yet thought did not worry him; for there was a great deal of time in which to think and, also, he was perfectly safe. He had got out of the police station by the skin of his teeth. What a fool he was to go! What a fool of a policeman to let him go! His brain worked smoothly; it was clear, clean, regular and well oiled: it was like Jane's typewriter!Later on, he thought of Cackle Street; which Jane had written and for which he had the money and the fame. Poor old Jane!Then he thought of all those things which he had written for Mr. Branch, while Jane was alive, and of the play he started on after she died, and when Cackle Street boomed.In writing, he had merely been delivering himself of dreary small emotions. The form of delivery was transient; it did not represent his life. So far, he had not begun to live. He had been gambolling about and getting into mischief. He did not wish to live; he was in no mood to experiment further.One day—with a ridiculous sense of wonder—he supposed that if he got better he had better marry his nurse. She would jump at the author of Cackle Street. Marrying a nurse was not like marrying an ordinary woman. A nurse was cool; she had her profession. He might do worse. Next time she came to the side of his bed, he regarded her smiling starchy plumpness. If he married her she would always be ready to put him to bed and feed him.Nurses were wonderful women and the only sort he wanted. He went on wondering what else he could do if he got better. The doctor and the nurse knew that he would be better and before very long; but he hoped he was going to die. To die would be dramatic, to get better would be feeble—and just the sort of thing he usually did. He could not even cut Jane's throat; she, killed herself with sleeping powders.If he got better he might commit suicide. He could go down to Cornwall and jump off the rocks as his grandfather did. No! His grandfather pushed the other man over.Cornwall was a long way off and so was Becca. The thought of Becca made his eyes ache; that girl was like a blazing garden. If he went to Cornwall and tried to jump off a rock, Becca would come behind and tug him in by the coat tail. She would make of him an absurd salvage instead of a strong suicide.He chuckled feebly, he slipped down in the nice warm bed. Then again—as to drowning—the splash in the water was not the only splash he wanted to hear. He would like to see what the newspapers said about it. As he got stronger, he wondered if Cackle Street was still running. He had some interest in the matter, yet not enough to ask the nurse if she knew. What was the good of asking? She would not tell him the truth. She would tell him one of those soothing lies at which they are so adept with the invalid.The day came when they got him out of bed for an hour or so. He sat by a sunny window in his dressing-gown. There was not much movement in the street below, but the little there was turned him giddy. He implored them, nearly sobbing, to put him back to bed. But he had to get up the next day and the day after. Suddenly, he came to realise that he was going to live, not die. His body got stronger and his brain began to suffer. His acts passed in a steady pageant before his abashed, his anguished glance.He knew himself for what he was—a murderer! Just that!Men might believe him or refuse to believe, men might punish him or refrain, but he was certainly Jane's murderer. He had murdered Jane.She never would have taken an overdose of sleeping powder if he had not stood by her bed with that open knife. She would have been alive now; rich with Cackle Street and riotous. How she would have bragged! And spent money like water. Generous, vulgar Jane! Always overdoing it.He must get better. He must make Buttifant believe him; and Branch and that heavy-looking, rosy oaf of a policeman at the station near Verulam Buildings. He would be tried for his life and perhaps hanged. Oh but they would never hang him! The law was so non-subtle, the English mind was so exact when it came to crime.Perhaps nobody would even believe him; but he would try hard. He would also say that Jane had written Cackle Street. This they certainly would not believe; for he had no proof. He had burned her notebooks and the MS. of the play.He sat by the window in his dressing-gown; a little yellow-faced man, with a skull of satin brightness. The nurse looked at him with interest; he was outside the usual run of patients. He had written Cackle Street!He did not look like it. She supposed that these clever people never did look like it. As to talking brilliantly—as the play talked—she had seldom met a duller young man.He sat looking down at the clean bright street and the summer people."If this weather lasts, Mr. Vaguener," she said, still watching him, "you'll be able to get out for a little while. We could drive in the Park."John-Andrew shrank back; he looked wistfully at his bed.In the bed he had ignored and half forgotten. Sitting in the chair—stronger, clearer—he was guilty and afraid. He would tell the whole truth but he dreaded it.He would, once get out of this place, force the proof of his guilt down every throat; yet one and all, they might refuse to swallow!What should he do with his life then? Oh what should he do?They would not believe him. He had no proof. He had been so crafty, so immensely clever, that night in Gray's Inn when he slipped out of Buttifant's set into Jane's. And he had been clever over Cackle Street.
They would not believe. They would run him into a Nursing Home again. Or perhaps a Lunatic Asylum. They would consider him permanently unhinged. He must bear the burden of it all his life. And that would be a worse punishment than just the swift rope about a man's neck.When he got to bed again he turned in it, with a fatigue that was swift and slow. He had been happy in this bed. Why did they take him out? In strict Justice, there were only two places for him: the bed upon which he lay, the scaffold upon which to face Death. He was constrained—logically—to die and soon; in one place or the other. But they would not let him. They insisted that he should go on living: the ignoble course always came his way.He kept turning about. The nurse watched. She came and shook his pillow up, in the soothing manner they had."Try and go to sleep," she said.He did try but he thought sullenly as he dropped off, that the attitude of people here—the nurses and the doctor—was rather an insult to his intelligence. For his brain was better than theirs.The nurse said brightly next morning:"If you go on as you are going, Doctor says you can see visitors.""For God's sake—don't! " said John-Andrew.He clung to her."I want to stay with you," he said. For he felt (he a guilty man—as his grandfather had been guilty in 1854) the need of a kind good woman to whom he might cling. He wanted mothering.She patted his shoulder and gave him his tonic. He went to sleep. Yet, uneasily, he knew that these people in the Nursing Home meant to get him well; they meant to get rid of him. His recovery helped their reputation.They had cured the author of Cackle Street, he grinned within himself malignantly. For he had sardonic humour—of a sort. He reflected that he had more than the usual conceit of the imaginative creator. People who did things, good or bad—writing, painting; anything—they were always chock full of conceit: they called it 'personality.' But he, who had done nothing, could beat them all at bragging.It was Jane who had done the beautiful work; noisy, coarse Jane. Within her, there must have been a sprout of something lovely. Yet who would have suspected it? As to his own work, as to those still-born essays and poems he had done while Jane lived, and as to the play he had started on since she died, he thought nothing of any of it. He felt that to write one more line of that play would turn him sick. Branch and the public must do without him.He came to the conclusion that he was no more a genius at writing than he had been a devotee in religion. Jane and Kenneth had the gifts; he had nothing. There was one other big thing left; the tiling called Love. He did not want that, for if, in the end, he married his nurse it would merely be that she might put him nicely to bed and feed him up.As to Becca! That girl, just the thought of her, took his breath away. She was so rampant and gaudy, so wonderful—say a man wanted love. He was beset by the uneasy feeling that he would not keep free of Becca.He had failed at religion, he had failed at art, he was chill with love.What was there then? Why go out in the world again? He wished, with all his soul, that these people at the Nursing Home would let him stay. If they turned him out, he would come back and whimper on the doorstep like a dog.He could not go back to the world and just eat and drink and wash himself. This routine contented ninety-nine men out of a hundred. They kept on doing this to a green old age and when the time came to die, they considered that they had lived. He wanted something real. Discontent, ambition and grief had been born with him. There must surely be something to keep a man quiet and make him full. What was it? Why could not he get it?Above all this ruminating, two emotions rose high; they battled in him. He knew that, really, truly, he had murdered Jane, if ever a man murdered a woman; therefore, he must give himself up, he must make people believe him guilty, he must take whatever punishment came. This sense of remorse about Jane grew strong as he grew strong; it coincided with recovery and for every pound of flesh that he put on, he carried triple that weight of penitence. He must convince the world; he must be hanged or go to penal servitude.This was one emotion. The other was a consuming desire for womanly pity, for beautiful mothering. It made him want to lay his racked head on the nurse's starchy bosom and implore her to marry him. If she married him she would always be there; he would carry a Nursing Home wherever he went.Suppose Buttifant, Branch, Graham the doctor, the policeman whose name he did not know and Kenneth his cousin, who was a priest,—suppose they all refused to believe that he was criminally responsible for Jane's death and that he stole her play? Suppose they refused to hang him or give him a good stiff sentence? Suppose they threatened him with a Lunatic Asylum? In that case, say he married the nurse, she would look after him, stand between him and them, keep him quiet and give him stuff to drink!He turned it all over, this way, that way, in his mind; sitting, yellow-skinned and little-eyed, by the window, or lying in his bed.He might confess to Kenneth. Suppose he did; Kenneth's lips were sealed. To say nothing of the fact that, in the confessional or out of it, Kenneth would hold fast to the idea that he was the victim of a delusion, that his brain was overwrought. His brain! What had it ever done?He was sitting by the window, looking idly out one afternoon, when he saw a taxi stop. He supposed that they had brought to the house some other patient. If so, then he was a lucky devil—for his time was only just beginning in this soporific place. Then he heard steps on the stairs and stopping outside and the door opening. It opened in a healthy, warm, whirlwind sort of way and like a warm whirlwind Becca swooped in.She came to the chair where he sat and dropped on her knees and put her arms round him."Johnny," she said, in one lovely gasp, "Johnny!"She hid her face in the brown, fleecy folds of his dressing-gown. Her red head lay across his breast and her summer hat was crooked—anyhow. Becca did not care."They left me in the waiting-room while they went off to see if you could be seen," she whispered, "but I'd heard them say what number your room was and I just skedaddled up. Johnny! I thought you might die. I've been afraid."She dropped her head and kissed his hands; that were queerly coloured and patchy—with their natural brown and their acquired invalidism.The quick whispering of kisses on his hands made John-Andrew think of dog's kisses. Becca's whole entry had been like the passionate rush of a beautiful pet animal, wild in its devotion, glorying in it, making of it a religion. Becca loved that way.John-Andrew's illness had broken down the slight barriers she had kept up. Kneeling there, rapturously kissing his unresponsive hands, she would have horrified not only her chill mother but all the other mothers. Maidenly modesty, as matrons construe it, Becca knew nothing of. She had merely her own modesty; of extreme and delicate passion. Her face was crimson as she kissed John-Andrew's hands, the blood rose up to the ridge of her red hair.John-Andrew's face relaxed."Becca," his voice was new and weak, it made her lift her head and stare, "will you take care of me? Will you marry me, Becca?" He had asked her instead of asking the nurse."Johnny! Yes—yes."He had never seen such a blush; it stained her neck.He kissed her gratefully on the mouth. She was going to take care of him.Her lips clung at his; as the other Rebecca's had clung to his grandfather's. He retreated into the padded shoulders of the chair; feeling breathless and coy.Soon after that he was well enough to go to Cornwall. One of the first things his aunt said to him on arrival was:"So Becca's got you! I knew she would."Mrs. Marshall spoke in her sage sensible manner of high cheek-bones; she added quite candidly,"I'm sorry, Johnny; because you didn't want to marry. You're not made for it."John-Andrew answered quickly: as if he rapped a table,"I want to marry. It's the only thing I do want."His aunt here implied in her manner a certain gawky disdain. He was not true to type. She had regarded her nephew as she regarded her son. In her mind they stood for the perfect celibate. John-Andrew was a pervert.She had to make the best of him as a lover—and such an enraptured one!John-Andrew did nothing by halves.In the Nursing Home he had wanted to marry Becca, because he wanted mothering. Becca was better than the nurse—she loved him more.In Cornwall, with the champagne air of the place and the drunken lovely spread of colour, over sea and over land—that was different. The embers of manhood reddened.Becca communicated to him by the sheer force of her devotion, the lovely thing that love is and the gift that it gives.He thought—and this was the third time—that he had found the thing which was good for a man: he was going to express himself at last.He grew stronger every day; and more imaginative. He could—once he accepted the idea—be even more absorbed by love than Becca was.He brought his passion, his remorse, his vague desires, his very guilt, to bear. Every emotion was concentrated into each kiss that he gave Becca; and each fiery thing that he said.She was so adorably shy: as he advanced so she receded. She plagued, indulged, led him on, eluded him. She knew it all. They fluttered in the mesh of their great desire. They hardly knew they trod the earth, they looked at people vaguely, they answered at random.Very often they went off for the whole day; sitting upon the hills inland, or sitting upon the violet edges of the cliffs and staring down at the vivid sea: not speaking much, exchanging quick, strange glances."If we never have anything else—we have had this," said Becca one day. She threw up her strong, clear chin.They were walking along the tops of the hills above Towednack. It was getting sunset and they were travelling home.John-Andrew stopped, he snatched her in his arms."Darling! Anything else! Why we haven't rung up the curtain yet, Becca. And we are going to have a long, long run."Her head was in the nook of his arm, so she missed the sudden spasm of his face: he was thinking of Cackle Street, he was remembering Jane. And he remembered that he had made up his mind to confess. Now he would not. For Becca's sake he dared not.This burden he must carry all his life for Becca's sake. She believed him to be both good and clever.They descended by little jogging stages to the high road. An invalid chair was being drawn along it."Old Mrs. Polmeor," said Becca. "What's she doing out so late? But she does go out late if the mood takes her. She's so eccentric. And she's horrid to look at, Johnny. Turn your head away as we pass; for I shall be like that when I am old."John-Andrew picked up her hand as it swung at her side. "Old," he said incredulously.He kissed her hand; with a frantic dog-like ardour; just as she had kissed his in the Nursing Home."Yes—old! Doesn't it seem as if—it can't be?"Becca laughed, saying this. She looked away across the sea, and then across the great hills with their fronds of green bracken. Old age could never come. It was years off and years. Each moment was delight—and eternal. They made their own Time, she and John-Andrew. She stood still; enslaved and quivering while he flung kisses on her hand.When they got to the road they met the chair. Mrs. Polmeor had contrived this."She's sure to want to stop," whispered Becca, "she always does, and then she says nothing. When she comes to the Rectory we have quite a business to get rid of her, although she only sits and stares."The chair stopped.Rebecca Polmeor looked out at them. She looked out from a thicket of wrinkles, from the fusty wrappings of chilly old age. Her mouth dropped open. She did not speak. She only looked at the two with a terrible eloquence which they would never translate.They were lovers—and the grandchildren of her lover. A breath of their rapture blew to her."Hasn't it been a lovely day, Mrs. Polmeor?" said Becca.She drew near to John Andrew. There was something repellent about old women—and about this old woman more than most.Rebecca Polmeor saw the disgust on their two faces: youth's intolerance of age. Yet she did not feel old to-night and looking at them. She could not speak, she could only stare; that dull look from old eyes that have sunk in the head. When she had looked up from the winding road and seen them coming—airy, jaunty—from the top of the hill—she had stopped her chair, she had meant to speak. She could have said everything. Now she said nothing that mattered."A lovely day," she repeated mechanically and nodded her head once or twice and made a sign to her servant to pull the chair on.John-Andrew and Becca proceeded. They flung the old woman a smile."There is a garden in her face," he quoted almost before they were out of earshot. "She wouldn't be so ugly if she washed her face.""She does. But it's no good washing that sort of skin, Johnny. And it's going to be mine.""And mine, Becca.""Yes; but men's looks don't matter. When I am old——""Oh, love!" he stopped her in the middle of the winding road, "you'll never be old. That you should look like that! It's impossible.""Not a bit. I expect Mr. Polmeor said the very same thing to her upon this road a hundred years ago.""Your golden tinge!" John-Andrew's palm ran down her cheek." And those brown flaps of skin on her face!"Night was coming. The light grew looming; scents came from the earth and from little scuttling field beasts and nervous, humming insects. Here and there was a light upon the sea, here and there a star in the sky or a lamp in the town. His arm went round her, they walked on slowly; in a little panic of sorrow because each step brought them nearer the Rectory and ended their day.After a few paces, Mrs. Polmeor made the man stop the chair. There was a farmhouse standing off the road."Draw my chair to the side and leave me. Go and ask Mrs. Peter
Noall if she's got any ducks' eggs to sell. And don't," her old laugh was harsh," hurry back, William-Henry.""You'll be laid up with the bronchitis if you stays out after dark, missus," the man protested. "You'll give trouble at home."He was an old servant and had drawn her chair and worked in her garden for years."If I do, I can pay for trouble, William-Henry. You get along and ask for the ducks' eggs."He went off grumbling. So Rebecca Polmeor was alone; alone on this wonderful road, in this wonderful land; with her own wonderful heart beat: it beat the years back.She knew this land so well. Her eyes had looked on this when they were young and bright, when they could weep. They were still bright, deeply sunk in her head and wickedly shining, but they hardly ever wept. She was old. Cynicism had dried her tears at the spring.She sat in the chair alone, she heard the servant's steps descend to the farm; then the door opened and he went in.The sea was breaking by Clodgy. Another sound came back; it was Becca's laugh; arrogant and happy as she walked with John-Andrew.Rebecca Polmeor sat stiff, her limbs cold with rheumatism; clogged by the shawls and the bundly wrappings of an old woman.How long she had lived! It was marvellous. When as a young woman, she came crying along this road, or when she moaned out loud down there at Clodgy, or when she walked to Zennor and sat at the Window Rock, looking through and shrieking, "Johnny, Johnny "—above the shriek of the gulls; then she had not only wished to die but had felt that she must die before dawn.She laughed again; with savage brevity.It was terrible to be an old woman. Those two—his grandchildren—had shrunk from her. She could have struck them for that instinctive flinching. Yet she understood it.She sat alone, looking back at her long life. Her husband, her children! What were they to her heart? They were nothing; not as she sat here now, thinking of her dead lover. He was a murderer and he had not even cared for her. Yet she gave to him the wealth of her soul. Never had she changed. Never a day that she had not longed for him and secretly said his name.Down all the years, she had said his name: in her garden, or sitting by her fire at night, when the children were put to bed and her husband was out in the parish.Since she was a widow she had said it; and since she had heard that her lover was dead; and since—by a ruse—he had got his son back to Cornwall; giving him—under another name—the living from which he, the murderer of Curnow, had fled.He had married, as she had married. But what was that—oh what was that?She laughed again; desolately, brokenly, out here upon the high road, on the way to Zennor in the dusk. After long ceasing—tears splashed down her face. She welcomed them: with the rapture that the old do welcome a recurrence of youth. For years she had not cried.She made no attempt to dry her face."Plenty of furrows for you to fill," she said strongly to her tears.Her voice was younger and warmer; she relaxed beneath her weight of wrappings.She sat in her chair, crying—after stiff cessation. She started trying with all her violent soul, to draw the man she loved from the mysterious place of spirits where he dwelt, to her side again. Let him come here and stand by the chair. Let him put his mouth on hers as he had done at the Rectory that one night, just that one night, sixty years ago.The next day he was a murderer.She sat in her chair, dusk thickening round her, salt water drenching her old face—and she remembered. She looked towards the sea and she listened. She saw afresh and breathed afresh the warm colour of that morning in 1854. She could see Curnow big and limp—inefficient and good-humoured—at the edge of the rock: she saw her little lover, strong and small and brown, push that unresisting giant over. He did it so easily; he just tipped him.She could sicken now—after all these years—at the sound of the splash, at the sight of big Curnow wrapped about by green and purple waves. Didn't they gobble him!She shivered. She was afraid: yes, afraid of the road that she had known all her life. She called out sharply as William-Henry emerged from the farm with his basket of ducks' eggs:"You stayed gadding too long. I'm chilled to the bone.""But you can pay for nursing, missus," chuckled the old man, tugging at her chair and taking her carefully downhill to Towednack.She was wiping her eyes.It was over—her pageant of agony, her revival of youth, her tears that she had welcomed.She had succeeded in beckoning suffering back. She was alive—still. She could hurt still. She could desire: a dead man—a dead old grandfather. Throughout her married life, she had always cast off her married ties in imagination, whenever she chose. She had taken them off as she would have thrown aside a domino.To-night she had cast off the domino again—the masquerade of her great years.Through the sight of those lovers she had cast it off.Upon the crest of the hill, alone in the dusk, while William-Henry bought ducks' eggs, she had been young.She muffled her throat and chest, she cuddled her lower limbs into the shawls and rugs as William-Henry jogged her down the hill. She had grown mortal cold since she left off crying.CHAPTER XIIIBECCA was sitting in the garden of the Rectory at St. Ives in October, 1914. At her feet, on that patch of grass which grew rank in the shade, were newspapers; all of them read in a hurry and flung excitedly aside: they bore that look. In her arms was a baby. It was very young and it had a fluff of thick black hair on its soft little helpless head. This head was somnolent near her golden neck. The October day was hot; her throat was bare and her arms showed through the sleeves of her blouse. Behind her was the fuchsia bush with its red frail bells, behind that, the window open, was Kenneth's study, in a great disorder.The room looked much as it had done on that June morning in 1854 when John Trewhella prepared to fly in haste, because he had murdered Curnow.Becca could hear the beating of waves at Clodgy and she could hear a slow bell ringing from Towednack.Buttifant coming across the fields from Hellesvean and opening the garden gate, thought that he had never seen anything more appealing than the look of this ruddy-headed yellow - skinned young woman sitting there with her baby. She presented a figure which belongs to all the ages. When she saw him, the glad, friendly colour ran into her cheeks; but she did not stir."You! What a delightful surprise!" she held out her hand and leaned carefully forward. "The Commander and your mother are not at Carbis Bay are they?""No. They are in London. I came to see you and John-Andrew. I wanted to see you; felt I must.""How nice! Johnny will be so glad; he wants a man to talk to. I," Becca's laugh ran out of her in sheer mirth, "would be content—just making love and being silly about the baby. A man wants more and wants it different. Does he?"She spoke without a touch of mournfulness. She was amply happy; that was plain. From a queer gawky girl, she had grown into a grandly formed, placid wife and mother. She was at once vivid and placid; that was the wonder of Becca. Buttifant expressed it to himself this way.Becca's virility and her flaming sense of life, had from the first made a complete conquest of him. Her egoism carried everything before it. Here we were, as a nation, in an early state of martial upheaval; yet Becca only asked for John-Andrew's worship and for a patter of nonsense over the baby. She made you forget the astonishment of war; she drove you gaudily into the domesticities.Buttifant sat himself on the grass. He sat with his knees hunched and his arms round them; looking white, small and compressed."Do men want more than that?" he lifted his brows. "I wouldn't.""I don't believe you would." Becca looked down at him. "But then poor Jane——"She broke off, seeing his face change; it blotched and wavered."I'm sorry," she said. "What a great, happy, clumsy beast I am!""Don't be sorry. I've been to Highgate. I went to see her grave. I went straight from there to Paddington and came to Cornwall.""You shouldn't have gone. Where's the good?" Becca was impatient with him; as happy people living in the broad sunlight are."I shan't do it again," Buttifant said meekly." Not for a long while; perhaps not at all."His voice, throughout, had been weighted with meaning, but Becca never noticed. She was beaming at her baby. Yet she was not the ordinary plump young mother—there was something more than sheer maternity to those slant-wise, wicked dark eyes of hers. Little petals! He had always thought of them that way. Plenty of weeping for Becca somehow, somewhere. He felt sure of it.He shut his own eyes, he very gently rocked himself, as he sat on the grass in the scented shade, listening to the sea and listening to the church bell that rang from Towednack."The contrast," he said," between this and Highgate Cemetery! All the paths there have been newly gravelled—at least I thought so. All the stones have been scraped; men are sweeping up each leaf as it falls. Such order! Jane must be delighted.""Don't dwell on it," said Becca. "No doubt Jane is better off. We are taught to look at it that way. Mr. Buttifant—do look at my son's hands. John-Andrew the Second's hands!"She detached one tiny paw from her neck where it lay, drew it to her lips and kissed it."Real finger-nails," she said triumphantly. "I kiss them a thousand times.""They're nice little hands." Buttifant regarded them. "Wonder what they'll grow up to do! Aren't
you glad they're not big enough to hold a——""Weapon!" Becca's face stirred from its maternal repose. 'Yes, I am. Yet it must be wonderful to give a son for your country.""I can't make my mother see that," said Buttifant meaningly."Mr. Buttifant!" Her voice, so he thought, was like Jane's. "You haven't enlisted?""I have. It's what I came down to say.""Oh!" Becca became more stirred. "And Gabriel Best has gone. And Kenneth's going to be an Army Chaplain. He volunteered at once. Just look at his study," she jerked her red head back. "Did you ever see such a mess? I don't mind Kenneth going at all, nor did I mind Gabriel—much. But I don't want to lose you."She looked at Buttifant radiantly."You are," she added and holding out her hand, "such a brick! Go on living, go on doing water colours."Then she laughed.Buttifant took her hand and held it. They understood each other. They always would, because they had the knack of love. They were thinking of Jane in her tidy grave at Highgate. Becca said,"If she had lived, you wouldn't have gone?""Very likely not. Yet I don't know. Perhaps this war is the bigger thing. You don't know till you have to choose.""John-Andrew mustn't choose," said Becca sharply."What mustn't I choose?"John-Andrew came quietly through the long window of the study. He put his lean brown hand on his wife's head. When he touched her she flung up her face in hearty, yet shy response and, stooping, he kissed her strong chin.Buttifant watched them. With John-Andrew, caress had already become merely a respectable habit, with Becca it remained new, and, in a sense, stolen."Johnny! You came like a ghost! Kenneth's study is a ghostly place. You see Mr. Buttifant sitting there don't you?""I see him," John-Andrew shook hands with Buttifant, then squatted down on the grass by his side, "but I see you first."It was a pretty turn but quite mechanical. Buttifant watched. John-Andrew had preserved the form of his courting days but it was no longer symbolic."How jolly of you to turn up, Buttifant! I wonder I didn't meet you at the station. I've been down to see if they've put out any more placards about the war. Anything fresh happened?""No.""Yes it has, Johnny. Mr. Buttifant has enlisted; that ought to have a placard to itself."John-Andrew's face had conveyed to Buttifant a steady sadness, but now it changed. It became the distraught face of that John-Andrew who had lived in Gray's Inn upon the earnings of Jane."You've enlisted!" he stared blankly at Buttifant. "My God! That's a way out."He smartly slapped his friend's leg."A way out!"Becca said this. Her husband met her dark eyes."This way out!" he said with a rapid gesture of his arm, stretching it and pointing. "I've seen signposts in my time, darling, and this is one."Kenneth had a bracket clock with a pretty chime in the study. It now struck! Becca instantly gathered her baby together and stood up. It was past feeding time. She suddenly thought of nothing else."Don't let Johnny get too excited about the war," she said warningly to Buttifant, then went away.What wonderful ways women had with a baby! Little devout gestures, dovelike movements. It came to them naturally, as swimming came to ducks. All Buttifant's passionate tenderness for women stirred. He watched Becca go into the house, passing through Kenneth's study with its distraught and broken look of tumbled papers and disordered furniture.He was alone with John-Andrew. They sat hunched together on the long grass in the shade; with sea breaking, with a bell ringing. How demented John-Andrew had been just before his breakdown about Jane's typewriting bell! There was nothing demented about him now—save for that moment when he had violently said, "My God."Absolute sanity sat upon his face and steady sadness. Yet he broke out, as Buttifant sat speculating upon him."Why did Becca come to the Nursing Home? Why couldn't she have left me alone?"So that was it! He had this glorious Becca with their child; yet he was not satisfied. He had his fortune and his reputation as the author of Cackle Street. He was not satisfied. What more did he want then?Buttifant was silent, sad and contemptuous. Some men got everything, yet they grizzled! If he—now—could have stepped into a garden—and found Jane sitting there with a baby! And come behind and put his hand on her round fawny-coloured head! And kissed that good-tempered face with the pale eyes that steadfastly refused to talk! If he could have clone that. And it was—never. For Jane was dead. He was fresh from the stony coldness, from the awful order, of her grave and of all the other graves."If Becca had left me alone," John-Andrew dropped his voice, he looked backward into the tumbled study, "just a week or two longer, I should have told you everything. I should have persuaded you that what I said was true. For I did murder Jane. You can believe it or not.""I don't believe it and neither do you. Cut Jane's throat. Of course you didn't.""I didn't cut her throat." John-Andrew seemed confused. "But there is Cackle Street.""Cackle Street took it out of you more than you suppose. I don't wonder: it is stupendously clever, Vaguener.""I suppose it is." John-Andrew was cold, he was grudging; his little eyes, dark and sly, looked obstinately out to sea. "I shall never finish the other play. I've got plenty to live on. I've written and told Branch so. He took it very well; he's made pots out of me, confound him. I never cared for Branch.""I wouldn't hurry about another play," said Buttifant soothingly.He was profoundly relieved to hear that John-Andrew had dropped the idea of this second play. It was shocking drivel. John-Andrew had read it to him since he came out of the Nursing Home."There has been," John-Andrew looked steadily seawards, his face was like a cold drizzle, a day sulkily set in wet, "such an utter lack of glory about everything I've done. I'm soulless, I'm cold. I'll go to the war. I'll get killed. They may stick up over me, 'Here lies a chap who'd got no soul.' ""Soulless, cold!" Buttifant could only echo him. "Why the tenderness and the poignancy, the vigour and fire of Cackle Street——""Oh curse Cackle Street," shouted John-Andrew.Buttifant was far from cursing this transcendent play. Quotations from it danced in his head, scenes from it moved before his eyes. He had seen it performed many times. His enthusiasm for it reflected his love for Jane. Cackle Street's source was her soul; but Buttifant would never know this.John-Andrew was sitting with his hands before his face. Buttifant had seen him sit that way before."I was religious once or thought I was," a desolate voice came through those slightly parted fingers, "yet I never denied myself, I only wanted to express myself, to satisfy and content myself—and the rest of the world might be damned for all I cared. I wasn't like that dear old prig and duffer Kenneth. He's slaved over this unresponsive parish and now he's going off to the war to expend himself—probably uselessly—on another ungrateful rôle. Then there's Becca——""Ah, Becca!" said Buttifant reverently.John-Andrew took his hands from his face."Making love was wonderful—while it lasted," he said solemnly. "I thought I'd found the thing I wanted. I'm always thinking of myself; it's just me, just me—me. I didn't care what she wanted or what she felt. I didn't give her a thought. Marvellous days, those courting days. I remember one night on the hills above Towednack and—by the way—you hear that bell ringing? There is a bell isn't there?""Yes, there's a bell, right enough.""Of course there is." John-Andrew sounded relieved. "Old Mrs. Polmeor is to be buried to-day. Becca told me so at lunch time. Then we got married and went to London to live and then I got bored; the spirit went out of it, the reality died: the thing—the joy you know—the thing I thought I'd found—made a face at me. That's all. It was the same with religion and the same when I took to writing. Now it is the same with Becca and the boy. Poor little beggar! I hope he won't have such a proud stomach—of the emotions—as his father." John-Andrew laughed wildly. He got up, straggling on to unsteady feet."My God," he burst out again, and looking down at Buttifant," I'll go to the war. I'll enlist, as you've done.""You might do worse." Buttifant met his frenzied glance. "You'll have your nose against the real thing at last. But you have—her—to think of."He could hear Becca very softly singing in an upper room—the veriest little buzz of a humming; nothing more. He could hear her even footfall on the floor. She was getting the boy to sleep.Poor little Becca! Her time to cry would surely come.John-Andrew shook his sleek head. "I shan't think of her. When did I ever think of anybody? My dear old man, you leave me to manage Becca."He looked haggard yet enlightened. He had sprung a fresh hope. He would enlist. Yes! War for him: and so find peace."I'll see you later on," said Buttifant, rising suddenly, "she'll be coming down presently.""Tea's at four." John-Andrew sounded sane as Buttifant strolled towards the gate.Becca returned to the garden soon after. She sat down by her husband; she took his limp arm and laughing, playing, settled it round her waist."I've got him off to sleep, Johnny. You wouldn't like to come upstairs and look?""Not now," John-Andrew's voice was tired and gentle, "I'll see him before I go.""Before you go! Where? Not into the town on the chance of more old silly newspapers, darling; because we can't make the war wag faster than it does. It is awful, this war." Becca's voice deepened. "It is beginning to take even me by the throat, although I'm so deliciously happy. Mother's upstairs crying and going through Kenneth's things. It seems almost an outrage to be happy when everybody is miserable. And fancy Mr. Buttifant enlisting. His mother must be broken-hearted. She adores him.""A decent mother," said John-Andrew austerely, "would be glad to see him go.""And a decent wife?" Becca stuck her flaming head wickedly under his chin. "Would she be glad?"John-Andrew lifted her head. With an implied weariness, he shoved her softly away. Becca's caresses began to stifle him. They shocked him.She sat up. He had his arm round her waist—since she had put it there; he held her hand fast. This was his own caress; tense and it hurt her. That grip of his hurt her very much. She grew whiter but she never moved. John-Andrew must always do whatever he liked with her.Suddenly his whole body seemed to slip; he became universally limp, he ducked his head and laid it in her wide, soft lap. His arm was drawn from her waist, her hand that he had wrung and pinched was free. He had his mouth at her skirt and his nervous clawing fingers. He was kneeling distractedly in the long grass."Let me go to the war, Becca. Don't hold me back. Let me kill if I can't create." He was fierce and broken."Create! But Johnny, there is Cackle Street."They were hurling it at him, stuffing it down his throat. This was to be his punishment; they would choke him with Jane's play. Paper and not a rope would hang him!He said to Becca, as he had said to Buttifant, "Curse Cackle Street.""It was too much for you." Becca stroked his satin-sleek black head. "You have never quite recovered from the strain."She was looking at the sea and thinking of ships that were crossing it: ships that carried away the men, leaving their women alone. Yet her man she had."I can't let you go, I won't. And he can't let you go and he won't," she said passionately."He! Who?""The baby."She was crying violently; her tears tickled John-Andrew's jaw, as they pattered on his head, then trickled sideways."Don't go, Johnny, don't go. We are so happy."He lifted up his face. She had never seen anything so grim. John-Andrew turned her joy to stone."I can't be happy if I don't go, Becca. Dreadful things may happen if I don't go. For his sake, for all our sakes—for God's sake—let me go. It is our only chance."He wailed at her.She surveyed all the bewilderment of agony upon his pinched yellow face. She had not wiped her own face. It remained wet and her little crooked dark eyes were lurid. She said after a long time—and through that time John-Andrew continued to stare at her in his new terrible way:"Yes—you go. I don't know what you mean, but—go!"John-Andrew blundered up, he dragged her with him, he encompassed her in his arms. They clung and hung together, not speaking; shaking, crying both of them. Rebecca Polmeor's funeral-bell rang at intervals through the sweet, salt, sun-laden air.John-Andrew began to fling kisses upon his wife's neck, upon the lobes of her little ears."Becca! Yes—I'll go."He said this, then he let her loose, he pushed her coldly into her chair. He had no further use for her.She said hysterically:"You plump me down in this garden chair as if you were putting an angel on a throne. Reverently—but in a hurry. As if you didn't want me any more.""You are an angel," he stood over her, "but they are no good at the war. So—putting it that way—I don't want you any more. I'm done with you."He spoke thoughtfully. His look at her was new.She was wiping her eyes and realising all her coming woe.He turned away aloof and radiant."I'll go and find Buttifant," he said, speaking over his shoulder and hurrying towards the garden gate.Becca watched him. He went trotting after Buttifant. Only Buttifant mattered: for he expressed the essence of soldier. Whatever jump the war took, she had lost John-Andrew.PRINTED BYWILLIAM BRENDON
AND SON, LTD., PLYMOUTHENGLAND