The "Yellow-Back" NovelHarry Rusche2005Genre FictionThe mid-nineteenth century witnessed a revolution in the world of
publishing. Anthony Rota notes in Apart From the Text (1998)
that if "one had to describe in one word the books that transformed
not only series publishing but all publishing in the last half of the
nineteenth century, it would be 'yellow-back'" (p. 221). In the
earlier half of the century the most popular form for the novel was
the "three-decker" published in series. Then Simms and McIntyre, a
Belfast publishing firm, introduced cheaply produced novels, usually
with covers of glazed yellow and illustrations--sometimes lurid and
garish--on the front of the book. These were sold in railway book
stalls for passengers looking for a way to wile away the time on
journeys. The price, several shillings, made the books affordable and
the stories made them popular. Simms and M'Tyre called their series of
novels The Parlour Library with almost 300 titles published between
1846 and 1856.Money was to be made on these cheap books and soon most publishers
issued their own series for the railway-passenger market. Routledge
entered the field with their Railway Library and by 1900, when the
popularity of the novels with their low standards of production and
their dubious content declined, Routledge had over 1,000 titles in its
inventory. The yellow-back never quite disappeared; it was simply
replaced by other forms of reading matter that were of higher quality
in both printing and content.Emory University added significantly to its collection of
yellow-back novels in the 1960's when the Library purchased a large
collection of more than 500 titles from Harold Mortlake, an English
book dealer. Emory regularly added to the collection until the
Library's collection of these cheap Victorian novels was outranked by
the two major collections in the United States: the Sadleir Collection
of the University of California, Los Angeles, and the New York Public
Library. A part of Emory's collection of yellow-backs are available
on-line as Emory's library publishes as e-texts the novels written by
and about women. The digitized yellow-backs are part of the Lewis
H. Beck Center's project, Women's Genre Fiction.For a brief history of the yellow-back and its place in publishing
history, the source for the information in this brief introduction,
see Anthony Rota, Apart from the Text, Oak Knoll Press (1998),
pages 221-26.