Front cover of Bell's The Under Side of Things.Back cover of Bell's The Under Side of Things.Inscription by the author in the front of Bell's The Under
Side of Things.Lilian BellFrontispiece included in Bell's The Under Side of Things.THE UNDER SIDE OF THINGSA NovelBY Lilian BellAUTHOR OF
"THE LOVE AFFAIRS OF AN OLD MAID" "A LITTLE SISTER TO THE
WILDERNESS" ETC.NEW YORK AND LONDONHARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS1898Copyright information for Bell's The Under Side of Things.THIS BOOK Is Lovingly Dedicated to MY SISTER CLARA
BELL LESSIG WHO IS THE VERY PULSE OF MY HEARTTable of contents for Bell's The Under Side of Things.THE UNDER SIDE OF THINGS
ITHE MOTHER OF ALICEIT was written in the outlines of Mrs. Copeland's nose that she was
a Code of Public Morals, which you would do well to investigate and
live by. So remarkable was this eloquent feature that no description
could bring it before you, no portrait do it full justice, because it
shifted its position, not upon her face--pray do not
misunderstand--but in its attitude towards the world. It needed not
the cold grayness of her near-set eyes to accentuate its standard of
Self, for if you could put your hand over her eyes, still you never
would think of asking that nose for anything. No ill-clad, desperate
man would beg her to visit his sick wife; no lost child ask her the
way home. Had she been a man it would have been the nose of a
money-getter, a money-lender, a usurer.The peculiar thing about it was that it had no salient points by
which to describe it. You could not recall her to a friend by
referring to her nose, for it was neither hooked nor retroussé,
but when once you saw it you never forgot it. It meant so much of what
had happened, and presaged so clearly what would happen. It was
neither large nor thin nor high, and yet it was all three, but so
cunningly were these attributes combined that you noticed without
speaking of it. The nostrils were not thin to show sensitiveness. They
were not thick. They were shapeless. And in a nose plainly intended by
Nature to be pointed, there was an unexpected broadness in the end,
which meant sufficiency unto itself, and a determined belief in the
supremacy of her Ego over the Egoes of everybody else in the
world. Her nose challenged your pedigree on the spot.If you had your own life to live, and your own view of how to live
it, Mrs. Copeland's nose became most annoying. There is a virtue so
blatant that it becomes a vice. Hers was of that order. You felt that
you ought to adopt it and that she thought so too, and that if you
were in her family she would make you.After one critical look at her nose you knew why George Copeland
went to West Point when his father hoped he would be a lawyer. You
knew why Alice Copeland, having
been brought up by her mother, loved her father the best. You knew why
the poor sometimes refused to accept blankets from her, which entitled
her to order their whole future lives to suit herself. You knew why
beggars occasionally threw her bread back in her face. You knew why
she never gave generously, palms outward, but always with her hands
turned in. You knew why, when she sent a sick friend a potted plant,
she asked her to return the pot; or if she sent her jelly, she asked
her to return the glass. You knew why she always walked to church on
Sundays, rain or shine, with her black kid hands crossed over one
another, her whole attitude that of an unrecognized martyr, her stiff
skirts breathing the Pharisee's prayer. And if you were a weak-minded
person, and Mrs. Copeland's way on a rainy Sunday lay by your house,
you knew why you altered your feeble intention of staying at home, and
why you went to church too.Yet nobody ever discovered all this except Kate Vandevoort, who
gave this description to Mollie Overshine after her first
interview. But then Kate was frivolous. Everybody who did not know her
said so.This morning all that you could see of Judge Copeland across the
breakfast-table was the Philadelphia Press. Undoubtedly he was behind it, for no paper, no matter how stiff its
policy, could have sat up there alone. Besides, on either side of its
outstretched pages you could see the judge's fingers, one of which
wore an amethyst ring, with the crest of the Copelands embedded in it
in tiny diamonds.Mrs. Copeland sat opposite, behind the fat silver coffee urn, whose
polished convex sides transformed her narrow, aristocratic countenance
into an impertinent cartoon. It turned her long nose into the squat
feature of a South African, and broadened her dignified mouth
daringly. If that urn had not belonged to the Copelands for
generations, Mrs. Copeland never would have tolerated the impudence of
the caricature. As it was, she never permitted the butler to stand
where he could obtain this view of her. She had been known to dismiss
a maid without a moment's warning because upon first catching this
glimpse of her new mistress in the coffee-urn she had burst out
laughing, and, flinging her apron over her head, had rushed from the
room in confusion. If Mrs. Copeland had possessed a sense of humor she
might have forgiven the unfortunate creature. But the outrage to her
sacred dignity was so great that it was only partially wiped out by
ordering the poor maid's trunk set outside the gate in a pouring
rain. She never knew that the judge quietly paid for the ruined clothes and a month's wages besides. And
it was better so.On one side of the table sat Alice Copeland. You would not consider
her face unusual until you knew her. Then you wondered how she came to
be so pretty. Her mother never realized how she absorbed Alice's
personality. She still regarded her as a child.Opposite to her, on the other side of the table, her younger
brother squirmed. Gifford's years are of no importance. He was at the
age when boys wriggle. George, the older boy, was at West Point, and
breakfast was half over before little Elsie, long-legged, thin, and
sallow, came in, with a martyred expression, and sat down without
greeting any one. Mrs. Copeland permitted her to do this because she
was shy. As a result, her manners were always atrocious."I see by the paper," said the judge, cheerfully, looking over the
top of it, "that I have been appointed on the Board of Visitors to
West Point."The look of quiet pleasure faded from his face at his wife's
distinct silence, and an anxious shade crossed it."That will be pleasant, I think, for then I can see George." He put
forth this remark as one who was accustomed to apologize, not only for
himself, but for existing circumstances.Still no reply. Mrs. Copeland's knife grated harshly through her
toast, then slipped and struck her plate. A faint flush suffused her
face, the unmistakable flush of displeasure."Are you pleased, Mary?""I do not like to he informed of your movements through the columns
of the newspapers," she said, icily."But that was only my way of telling you, dear. I thought it would
be a little surprise.""I do not like surprises.""But I did it only for a jest.""I do not like jests."The judge's fine ruddy countenance paled a little. He stirred his
coffee, eying it absently. "I would have told you if I myself had
known it sooner," he said, looking up with a smile meant to propitiate
her."This cannot be the first you have heard of it," she said, refusing
his glance."No, but it is the first I knew of the appointment. I only knew
that my name had been suggested.""I think I might have been trusted with so important a piece of
news."The judge colored at her sarcastic emphasis." I know it is not much of an honor, dear, but you know I only
accept these things on your ac-count. I don't care for them myself. I would much rather
attend to my flowers and stay quietly at home with you. You are my
greatest attraction.""That is right! Make me feel how much of your comfort you sacrifice
for me," she said, ignoring the little compliment which many a woman
would have hugged to her heart all day.'Oh, my dear wife, I did not mean it that way. Pray pardon me. You
surely could not think me so rude as to insinuate that anything I do
for your pleasure is a sacrifice."She compressed her thin lips without replying."Who makes these appointments, father?" asked Alice."The President appoints the visitors at large, and the Senate and
House each appoints some of its members.""It is very nice, I think, to be selected by the President, to have
him reach down into private life in that way, and let you put a finger
in the government pie. It makes you feel so American.""And how else could one possibly feel when one is an American?"
asked Mrs. Copeland, who was of Scotch descent."One can feel any nationality here in America, when everybody has
more liberty than native-born Americans," said Alice.Mrs. Copeland frowned, and Alice and her father exchanged
sympathetic glances."I thought of taking you with me," he said to his daughter, with
all a man's unwisdom as to when to broach a subject."Alice cannot go," said her mother.The girl's face flashed and drooped in silence under these two
sentences. She knew better than to urge or coax."I thought perhaps she might like it," said the judge,
dubiously."It makes no difference whether she would like it if I think it
unwise for her to go.""But I thought it was time she began to see a little of the world,"
pursued the judge, anxious to vindicate his wisdom in the eves of his
wife. "She is eighteen. You were married at that age.""I think it hardly chivalrous of you to remind me that I have a
daughter as old as I was when I was married," said Mrs. Copeland,
biting her words off with great distinctness. "You have an excellent
way of reminding me that I am getting old. My mirror, however,
anticipates the courtesy of my husband.""Oh, my dear love, you misunderstood me. To me you are just as
young and lovely as on our wedding-day, and Alice here is a surprise,
a curious jest of Time. Alice, you must shorten your frocks. It certainly is a mistake for me to
have a grown daughter and a wife who looks even younger.""You will see George in his uniform, Alice, if father takes you to
west Point, and they have dress parade every afternoon, and all the
cadets carry guns, and their mothers aren't there to ask 'em if they
are loaded," put in Gifford, with a mutinous look at his mother. She
smiled at this, for he was her idol, but she would not trust him with
even the picture of a gun, much to his disgust."Alice is not going to West Point," she said. But it was a gentler
tone, and every one's countenance brightened. Even the butler stepped
more briskly. He was used to this sort of thing, however. He had been
with the Copelands twelve years.The judge, although scrupulously careful about his diet, had
dyspepsia. Perhaps this was because he went through with a good deal
at his meals besides eating, particularly at breakfast, which was a
pity. Breakfast is bad enough in itself, without any one selecting
that unfortunate time to be particularly disagreeable."Oh, let her go, mother! Let them both go, and we will stay at home
together. Or, no--you take me to Philadelphia. You promised, because I
had the measles. Now do!" cried the real diplomat of the family,
scrambling from his chair and rushing up to her. He trod upon her dress, but she did not
push him away."I'll see about it," she said."That means that you can go, Alice," he cried. "It always means
that, when she says she will see about it."Alice smiled without speaking."I'll go to Philadelphia, too," said little Elsie, suddenly.Gifford's face clouded. Alice shook her head at him imperceptibly,
and although he knew that Elsie's going would spoil everything for
him, he smiled at her bravely."You are not well enough, Elsie," said Mrs. Copeland. "You look
sallow. I think you ought not to have got up this morning."Elsie stopped eating, and refused her third waffle. She was the
sort of child whom you could make ill by telling her she looked
so."I am ill, but I want to go," she whimpered. Everybody looked up
anxiously."Let her go, mother," said Gifford. "She'll have hysterics if you
don't.""Very well. You can go, Elsie. The poor child is able to take so
few pleasures!" sighed Mrs. Cope-land. Elsie's face, which had
brightened at the prospect of Philadelphia, drew down to a proper
degree of martyrdom at her mother's last words. She had everything in the world she wanted, yet she
was always referred to as "poor little Elsie Copeland." Alas, to waste
the heavenly gift of pity upon the carefully suffering rich!"I am afraid the noise and crowd of the city will frighten my
little bird," said Mrs. Copeland, "and make her cry.""No, it won't," said Elsie.Perhaps it will not be anticipating too much to chronicle at this
point that Elsie went with them, and began to cry in the train, so
that by the time they were to begin the excursion which was Gifford's
reward, Elsie was in strong hysterics, and had to be put to
bed. Gifford spent the day with his little nose flattened against the
hotel window, gazing into the street and winking back his tears. But
he was growing used to it. Elsie always spoiled things for everybody
wherever she went.When Gifford and Alice were alone, after breakfast, Gifford seized
her hand, saying in an undertone:"I'll make her let you go to west Point, because you never told her
that I went in swimming on Saturday. You said you were going to, but
you didn't. That's just like a girl. And I'll make her let you and
father both go.""Perhaps you can't," said Alice, in a spiritless voice. "I
couldn't.""Ho! don't you know I can make her do anything? That is, anything
except let me have any fun with guns and
things. If I were father, I'd make her let me have a gun. He says I am old enough.""Make her!" said Alice, aghast. "Nobody ever
makes mother do anything. You oughtn't to speak so.""Ho! you're only a girl," said Gifford, scornfully, which
incontestable fact Alice did not attempt to disprove.IIA SMALL TOWNSTOCKBRIDGE, Pennsylvania, is situated on the Delaware River. It
was an old town even on the day when Alice Copeland was declared old
enough to see a little of the world outside its narrow limits, and
that was soon after the war, whose echoes were still reverberating in
women's ears, and whose ragged wounds were still bleeding in women's
hearts. In church the black-robed figures in mourning were silent
witnesses of the grief and losses which Time had not yet wiped
out. The quiet of the girl's life in conservative old Stockbridge had
been rendered even more absolute for this reason, and her education
had gone on without a break caused by anything more exciting than a
game of croquet in the morning or a game of whist in the evening.A small town in the East is as different from a small town in these
later days in the West as black is from white. Their chief point of
resem-blance is that everybody
knows everybody's else affairs. Otherwise let no one confuse the
two.In the West the broad open streets given by the generosity of the
never-ending prairies, are symbolic of the town's radical
hospitality. In the East the narrow, thrifty streets, jammed in
between the hills and the sea, indicate the town's conservative
selection of guests. In the West everything is new, nobody was born
there, and the graveyards are fresh and small and bustling. In the
East everybody was born there, everything is old, and the graveyards
are large and stately and silent. In the West there is freshly turned
sod and there are miles of barbed-wire fences. In the East there are
stone walls and ivy and green mould and lichens.In the West nobody knows who your grandfather was. In the East
everybody knew your great grandfather. In the West to hustle is to be
great. In the East everybody has time to be slow, and haste is
inelegant. The provincialism of the West is uncouth and broad. The
provincialism of the East is maddeningly narrow. The innate feeling of
a young man from a small Western town that he is only one of a
tremendous mass of humanity and that in order to be individualized he
must boisterously assert himself, that because his family name is
unknown in the great city he must shout
it in your ear and begin each argument with the premise that he is
just as good as anybody, springs from the nature of the new West. This
newness largely consists of a broad, democratic brotherhood, which
evidences itself in servants insisting upon being called "help" and
upon dining with the family. In a town of the same size in the East,
caste is recognized from the ancient order of things. The banker's son
who goes to New York states his name modestly and expects it to be
known. Very likely it is. If not, he is neither hurt nor offended. His
place in the economy of the universe is secure even if a few do not
know him. He goes on about his business quietly. It never would occur
to him to insist that he was "as good as you are"--probably because,
in his secret heart, very quietly and elegantly, he thinks himself
much better! Both young fellows, being Americans, are at heart
gentlemen. Their manners alone betray the difference in their
environment, and neither is to blame. Both are creatures of
circumstance and the natural product of their respective
civilizations.Because Alice Copeland had lived in the small town of Stockbridge
all her life was no reason why she was provincial in the Western
acceptation of the term. Her provincialism she inherited quite
naturally from her mother, and it only took the mild form of a feeling of indifference to all
the world except Stockbridge and Philadelphia. The names of the two
towns may differ in various Eastern States, but their tolerance rarely
gets beyond two, and when it does, it skips over to London and
Paris. It never, for instance, comes to include three--their own, New
York, and Boston, or their own, Philadelphia, and New York. For most
Eastern people the trinity does not exist. They have fallen into a
certain geographical unitarianism.If Alice was narrow, it was a very gentle narrowness, neither
obstinate nor froward. She was a Scotch Presbyterian because her
mother was. Everybody knows that the Giffords of Philadelphia have
always been Scotch Presbyterians. Alice never discussed the matter,
but she believed in election and predestination, and honestly thought
that no man could be saved unless he were equally firm in that faith,
and safe within the fold of the Presbyterian church, with his name
written upon the church-books in ink. Such simple, iron conviction
admitted of no discussion.Stockbridge had reason to be proud of one or two of its
distinctions, which set it apart from its fellows. It boasted no
theatre, but it had nine churches. Of course the Scotch Presbyterian
was the most prosperous, because the Copelands belonged there. Unsaved Baptists and Methodists, with their
less handsome edifices, sometimes shook their heads over the luxuries
of the Presbyterians, and smiled to think what old John Knox would
have said to their cushions and velvet hangings and choir. But they
never mentioned these things to Mrs. Copeland. Somehow Mrs. Copeland's
nose did not invite impertinent home thrusts like these. But the truth
of it was that this unusual spectacle of a rich church in those times
was grounded in the same fundamental reasons which made the Copeland
family unusual in other respects. Mrs. Copeland's Scotch blood made
her give steadily to her church, and the judge's French blood caused
him, if he gave at all, to give lavishly.But there were counteracting influences which kept down the pride
of the people in the godliness and chastity of their institutions, one
of which was the constant illness of the inhabitants. These ailments
seldom ended fatally. Indeed people died quite as often of old age or
railroad accidents in Stockbridge as anywhere else, but surely no town
could boast such varied chronic complaints, which just gently stirred
people's sympathy to a healthy activity and gave them an excuse for
visiting, as Stockbridge. Nearly everybody who was full-grown, and
there were also quite a goodly number of non-dangerous infantile
disorders, had his own
private malady, which was as distinctive and peculiarly his own, and
as unavailable to others, as his silver door-plate. Indeed, for one
family to lap over into another family's complaint without adding a
complication which made it individual would have been regarded as
impertinent a trespass upon sacred privacy as for a man to copy his
neighbor's grave decoration in the church-yard.On the evening of the day when Alice's visit to West Point was
trembling in the balance, a small excitement took place in the visit
of Colonel and Mrs. Christopher Overshine.The Overshines were next in importance to the Copelands, but just
now the Overshines were in a position to cast a lustre by their
presence upon even the Copelands. Mrs. Overshine, knowing the
importance of having a piece of news like a divorce almost in their
immediate family, for John Vandevoort was her own second cousin, had
held aloof from everybody, even from Mrs. Copeland, to whom her
friends always told everything first, as became her station, for
something like ten days, much to Mrs. Copeland's secret
annoyance. Outside gossip was scarce, of course, in a town like
Stockbridge, where nothing ever happened. Still Mrs. Copeland thought
there was no sense in Mrs. Overshine's acting as if she were the ark
of the covenant just because she was in the inner circle of a
celebrated New York divorce case. And
when on Sunday Mrs. Overshine went so far as to keep her veil down all
during the sermon, as if being related to the Vandevoorts made her
sacred, and afterwards made her way out of church to her carriage with
her head down, speaking to nobody, Mrs. Copeland's grenadier spirit
actually chafed under the restraint which Christianity imposed.Now, however, the Overshines were coming up the
walk. Mrs. Copeland, knowing, of course, that this was
Mrs. Overshine's first visit since the details of the divorce came,
forgave her impertinence of Sunday, and even felt a sort of respect
for the coup d'état which had made the
presence of Mrs. Overshine of more importance than that of any other
woman in Stockbridge.It was a pleasure to see Judge Copeland greet his guests. After you
had taken the colorless fingers of Mrs. Copeland, it was like floating
out into the Gulf Stream to look into his keen blue eyes and to see
him bend over your hand and to hear his courtly, "Good-day,
madam."The Copeland house was colonial, and set well back on a handsome
terrace fronting the river. From all the windows you could look down
upon the sinuous and tricky Delaware winding its indolent way to the
sea. Indeed, as if to accommodate so influential a family as the
Copelands, it even made a
gracious bend, and wandered past the dining-room windows, so that from
all over the house you had the loveliest view of its friendly
ways.Colonel Overshine limped to the window."The old Delaware is quite high just now, Judge. It doesn't look as
though it would ever get so low that the dust would blow off from
it.""No, no; it does not. It looks to me as though it were deep enough
to float the Kennebunk. It is a great pity our
river is not navigable up here.""You are right. It would straighten out a good deal of that snarl
about freight rates if the river would step in and say, 'Here, use
me.'""It would so. How is your knee, Colonel? This damp weather give you
an extra twinge now and then?""Oh yes. But I am getting used to it. You can get used to anything,
you know, Judge. A man could get used to hanging if he were hanged
every day.""Bad place to have a ball, Colonel. Never fails to leave a stiff
knee. John Feversham--you know Feversham who was colonel of the
Thirteenth Rhode Island and is now captain in the regular army?--he
had a stiff knee for two years, but he got rid of it in some way. He's
all right now.""Gad, I wish I knew how he did it," said Colonel Overshine, sitting
down, his lame leg stretched out stiffly
before him. "I hear about these marvellous cures, but I never see
them. Every once in a while me wife discovers a sure cure for a bald
head. But look at mine. Me two complaints are a bald head and a lame
leg, and I expect to die in full possession of both of them."The maid entered with a tray. Mrs. Copeland, being a total
abstainer, never served wine to her guests, but there was sure to be
lemonade and cocoanut cake in abundance."And she began to behave badly soon after they were married,"
Mrs. Overshine was saying.Both men forgot what they were talking about and listened."Me wife's cousin, John Vandevoort," murmured Colonel
Overshine."I have no patience with John that he did not take her in hand at
once," said Mrs. Copeland, who loved to direct other people's
families."Yes; but you know John. He is too gentle and lovely to take a fly
in hand, let alone that woman, who, as you know, is a wonderfully
attractive creature when she wants to be; accomplished, clever, sings
well, and they say she has written a book."Mrs. Copeland threw up both hands. "Poor John!" she said. "Is it
published?""No; and it may never be, now."Mrs. Copeland gave a sigh of relief. Things were very bad indeed with poor John Vandevoort, but
not as bad as they might be."She is perfectly well and strong, I believe," said Mrs. Copeland,
"so John has not had illness to contend with.""Oh no; she has some trouble which causes her to go into hysterics
every time she loses her temper. She gets violent at times. John says
he thinks her mind is affected.""Mind!" said Mrs. Copeland. "Temper! I know her. I saw her when I
went to New York to hear Sontag. She weighed nearly two hundred pounds
last winter, if I am any judge of weight from seeing a woman in so
shameless an evening dress as she wore.""I think so too. If John only had made a stand when they were first
married! He says he couldn't. When he told me of some of her tantrums
I said to him, 'John, a good shaking would do her good.' And he said,
'Cousin Mollie, she is the mother of my children.' Now you know I
couldn't say a word after that.""Children? I thought there was only one.""No, two; Frances and Margaret--Peggy, they call her.""What will he done with them?""John says I am to have them for a time.""And bring them here?""Yes."Mrs. Copeland cleared her throat in a pleased way. She was glad she
was going to see some of this trying and sad
affair."Where is Alice?" asked Mrs. Overshine.Mrs. Copeland eyed her sharply, knowing that Mrs. Overshine knew
and was overjoyed at the knowledge that Alice was out with Frank
Overshine. Mrs. Overshine only wanted to make Mrs. Copeland admit
it."She went to the archery meeting, I believe.""No, the Archery Club meets on Friday. This is only Tuesday.""Oh, then it must have been the Canoe Club.""Did she go alone?""No, Ellen St. Francis went with her.""And did those two girls go alone?""No, one of the young boys in the neighborhood went with them."Mrs. Overshine retired from the field, and rocked her chair in
exasperated silence."That is a handsome ring you have on, Judge," said Colonel
Overshine. "Have I ever seen it before?""I think not. My wife gave it to me on my last birthday," said the
judge, taking it off and handing it to him."Very fine stone. What is the design?"Judge Copeland leaned back in his chair, set his finger tips
together, and looked at the ceiling. Mrs. Copeland laid down her fancy
work. She was never without either her fancy work or her Bible. If
laid out in a straight line, she must have done miles of fancy
work. If read in a straight line, she must have read miles in her
Bible.She rested her long slim hands, glittering with rings, upon her
crewel-work--which in after-years passed through the various stages of
fashionable fancy work, through silk knitting, tatting, card-board
embroidery, and from that into centrepieces and drawn-work--and
Colonel Overshine looked towards her. Mrs. Overshine went on rocking
rather aggressively. She knew exactly what Mrs. Copeland was about to
tell. She had heard it before, dozens of times. She knew just how she
would tell it, how deprecating she would look at the mention of the
count's name, as who should say, "Of course we are not to blame for
having a count among our ancestors," and she knew how she would pause
and lower her voice before mentioning the duke's name, for here the
narrative grew really sacred. She knew it all, and followed it word by
word as Mrs. Copeland began."That ring, Colonel, contains the crest of the Copeland
family. Copeland is French, you know, and was originally Copelin. The
descent of the judge's branch of the
family is very direct through the Comte de Copelin, clear back to the
Duc de Copelin, his most famous ancestor."Mrs. Copeland never went further back than the Duc de Copelin, for
if she had done so she must inevitably have soiled her clean
Presbyterian lips by the admission that the famous duke's mother had
been a court favorite under Louis XIV., who had created her Duchesse
de Copelin, and laid the foundation of the Copeland fortune by the
presentation of the estates, which had since, however, passed into
other hands and bear another name.She could not be expected to admit that the Copeland family crest,
embroidered by her own fingers upon every piece of linen in the house,
from sheets and table-cloths down to doilies and handkerchiefs, had
had its origin in such a blot upon the family honor."Very fine," said Colonel Overshine."We have records," proceeded Mrs. Copeland, with dignity, "of the
military exploits of these famous men, especially those of the Duc de
Copelin.""Me wife has all the ancestors in our family," said Colonel
Overshine, with ill-placed jocularity; "all I know of mine is that me
grandfather was hanged for being a pirate."It is an old joke, but one very dear to the heart of the American man whose wife is interested
in family trees.Mrs. Copeland colored with displeasure. Mrs. Overshine smiled. The
colonel's grandfather had been governor of Rhode Island. Judge
Copeland, although relieved to have the oft-repeated narrative broken
off, looked anxiously at his wife, but she had taken up her fancy work
again, and had retired from the conversation. She turned her attention
back to Mrs. Overshine."What will become of Emily after she gets her divorce?""I am sure I don't know.""How distressing that she left him and now sues on the ground of
desertion.""Very.""Will he contest it?""I think not.""He could, though," put in Colonel Overshine. "He has plenty of
grounds against her, but he will not. He says he did not marry her to
take advantage of a woman's weakness. It is exasperating to hear him
talk. All he wants is to have the custody of the children. She is
capricious and utterly irresponsible. One week she loves them to
death, and the next week they never see her. They are the sweetest,
cleverest, worst children I ever saw; keen as razors, honest as the
day--just like John--own up to anything
they have done, and the older one, Frances, is as pretty as a
picture."Just then Gifford Copeland burst into the room."Softly, my son," said the judge."Good-evening, Mrs. Overshine. There are two children and a lady at
your house. They have just come in on the train. And they want to see
you immediately!"Mrs. Overshine rose hastily."I wonder if it can be Emily?" said Mrs. Copeland."It would be just like her to come into our house with her family,
and fight our cousin, her husband, from under our roof," growled
Colonel Overshine."Let me know if it is Emily," said Mrs. Copeland, at the door."Very well. Perhaps I'll send you word by 'one of the young boys in
the neighborhood,'" said Mrs. Overshine, sweetly.Mrs. Copeland smiled. She always smiled when another woman showed
temper.IIIALICE GOES TO WEST POINTIN some way, Gifford had managed it as he said he would, and Alice
was going to West Point.Gifford and his sister were on more friendly terms than many small
boys and their older sisters. There was an open-hearted, chivalrous
generosity about Gifford which would make his way through life quite
easy, and there was a gentleness about Alice which appealed to the
native manliness in Gifford, and made him want to "look out for
Alice." He considered her just the kind of a girl to be imposed upon,
and, young as he was, he already had begun to stand between her and
her mother, who was the one who profited most acutely by Alice's
sweetness.Gifford came out to the carriage-step to see them
off. Mrs. Copeland was up-stairs with a headache, a dark room, and
smelling-salts.It was so early in the morning the horses tossed their heads
impatiently and stamped their slim hoofs, for it was a glorious
day.Are you all right, sis?" asked Gifford, helping her in."Yes, thank you, dear. Don't be disappointed that mother is too ill
to take you to Philadelphia.""Ho, we'll go before you get back. Don't you worry about
that. Good-bye, good-bye. I lave a good time, and don't you come home
until you want to, Alice. I'll take care of mother for
you. Good-bye!"He kept shouting after the carriage until it was lost to view
around a bend.The river road to the station is so beautiful that it hurts you. It
makes your throat ache and your eyes smart, and you have to swallow
hard and often, for the beauty of it goes to your heart.The Delaware was at her best, high and proud, yet full of a tender
humility under the caresses of the morning, like a proud woman
conscious of her own beauty, yet willing to bend her pride to
gentleness under the influence of love.Father and daughter drove nearly all the way in silence, conscious
of each other's fulness of heart, and unwilling to break the spell by
trivialities. Sometimes they looked at each other and smiled, and
once, when they made a sudden turn which flashed into view a long,
narrow island almost covered with green grass, like a great emerald
marquise ring set in the centre of the river, Alice slipped her little gloved hand into her
father's with sympathetic understanding.Pacing up and down the station platform, waiting for the same train
they were to take, Alice saw a tall young woman, whose black veil,
dropping from her little round hat, concealed her features, and only
revealed at the back a wealth of auburn hair, dressed in the
prevailing fashion, resembling a peck measure. Her waist was the
smallest, her crinoline the largest, her skirts the most voluminous
that Alice ever had seen. Her whole costume had "New York" stamped as
unmistakably upon it as were the modest folds of Alice Copeland's
labelled "Stockbridge, Pennsylvania." She was tall and sweeping, and
Alice thought she never had seen anything so graceful as the way she
walked and managed her skirts. Alice watched her all the way to New
York, for without being nervous or vivacious, she was always
moving--always doing something worth looking at. Everybody else was
looking at her too, for although her veil was still down, she had the
assured manners of a beauty, and she seemed to exercise a certain
fascination upon every one in the car who sat within range of her.Her own carriage was waiting for her, and she gave no directions,
only nodded to the footman in answer to his salute, stepped in; the
door slammed, the man sprang
upon the box, folded his arms--and they were off.Alice actually sighed as she disappeared. She was foolish and young
and still had her ideals. Oh, lovely age, no matter when it comes,
when we can watch a fellow-traveller under a veil and fancy her
beautiful enough to love and believe her good enough to follow to the
ends of the earth!Keep it, Alice Copeland, as long as you can. It means much more
than an idle infatuation. It means youth, and innocence, and
unshattered ideals, and the song of birds and eternal spring-time in
one's life. Be foolish and unwise while you can. Once you lose the
capacity, it never comes again. Once you begin to know, you begin to
hate. What need have butterflies and lambs and song-birds and young
girls of wisdom?"Venus went to Minerva, and said, 'Teach me wisdom.' 'If I do,'
said Minerva, 'you never again can be the Goddess of Love.'"Judge Copeland always went to the Astor House when in New York. He
had been going to the Astor House for twenty-five years. He had seen
it in its jubilee days, before the war, when all the Southern society
girls spent their winters there, when it occupied a proud position in
the way of celebrated beauties and aristocratic inmates. It was the
rallying place for all the flower and wealth of the South, and it witnessed such scenes of gayety
among first families as now only occur in country-houses during the
season. No hotel has ever been in this respect what the Astor House
was before the war. It was like a great house party, with all the
privacy of one's own apartments, or all the friendliness one chose to
bestow.Although much of its glory had departed, Alice enjoyed any large
hotel too much to be a captious critic, nor was she one to seek after
strange gods. The old, the established order of things suited her
simple tastes better than the fashionable and newer hotels to which
most girls would have inclined.After dinner they went to see Charlotte Cushman as "Meg
Merrilies."Alice never forgot that night. She sat in a box for the first time
in her life, and lost herself so completely in the play, and the
dazzling rows of lights, and the music, and the sense of being removed
from the people and of being in some way different from all that she
ever had been before, that she paid little heed to the gentleman in
their box--a certain Senator Cobb, from Ohio, one of their party on
the Board of Visitors. After one glance Alice hardly looked at
him. She was no judge of art; for in that one glance she decided that
he might be a youngish man who looked old, or an oldish man who looked
young.But Senator Cobb, so far from feeling hurt by her indifference, was
piqued into more acute interest in her than perhaps otherwise he might
have felt. The few years which had elapsed since his accession to the
Senate and his wife's death had been filled so full of attentions from
ladies possessing three eyes--their own and a weather eye, for the
senator's fortune was so large it was nebulous--that it seemed to him
he always had been an eligible and the recipient of this manifest
interest. It is so easy for one's Ego to grow accustomed to spelling
itself with a capital, and to forget that one's old friends had
hitherto always spelled it with a small letter.The truth of it was that the Cobbs, of Phœnix, Ohio, were
plain and simple folk. The first year in Washington had killed the
faithful little woman who had stood shoulder to shoulder with her
husband through all their unfortunate years, slaving at work much too
hard for her, and keeping up his spirit until coal was discovered
right under the very mortgage, you might say, which they were trying
to lift. It proved to have such power of raising things that it not
only blew the mortgage from overhead, but it lifted the Cobbs into
social and political power in Phœnix with such force that it
finally landed them in Washington.Perhaps it is hardly fair, for the honor of our na-tional politics, to ascribe all this to
coal--for the senator possessed undoubted ability, and made a very
good senator as senators go. But it is safe to
say that except for the coal Joel Cobb's abilities would never have
been discovered by the enthusiastic citizens of Phœnix. And
yet, when all is said, it does not require either coal or enthusiasm
or ability to make a candidate of "a dark horse." And it was as the
"dark horse" that Joel Cobb found himself in the Senate.Once in Washington, however, the coal was of inestimable
benefit--except that the social swim into which it floated them sucked
down his poor little adoring wife and left him a widower.But he was not an unusual man on certain lines, consequently he
never knew that anything except Washington life had killed
her. Neither did he know that she had worked too hard. Neither did he
know that it was her indomitable pluck and encouragement that had kept
a roof over their heads until coal could be discovered. It was as if
her grip on affairs had lasted only until some one else would take the
helm. For when she began to rest it was the beginning of the long
rest. Her resting-time came too late.The senator did not know this, nor would he believe it if he could
read this veracious history, for it would be a difficult as well as an
unkind thing to dislodge the
idea of his own importance, seeing that he derived his chief happiness
in life from fostering that harmless fallacy. It would have upset his
dignity and hurt his vanity to give any credit for his career to the
exhausted little woman who slept in the graveyard at Phœnix
beside her crippled boy. Indeed, his most famous campaign speech
contained these stirring lines:"Single-handed and alone, from a poor, unknown boy following the
plough day after day, season after season, with no encouragement from
man, woman, or child, with not one hand held out to offer the help I
so sorely needed, poor, ignored, uncared for, I, a simple farmer's
lad, with only my country's good at heart, dreamed great dreams of
this hour, and hewed my unaided way to success. (Loud applause.)"Single-handed and alone have I risen step by step, with only brain
and brawn to aid me. But, buoyed up by the noble motto 'Pro bono
publico,' I come before you at this time to lay whatever wealth I may
have built up, my highest powers of heart and head, at my country's
feet, and to serve her to the best of my ability in any capacity to
which she may see fit to call me." (Prolonged applause.)It was a great speech, although, of course, this is only a sample,
and, perhaps, an unfair one. It was much more impressive and stirring to hear him deliver it;
for there he stood before them, a living example to all other poor
boys who, like him, single-handed and alone have hewed or are hewing
their way to fame and fortune with no assistance from their toiling,
moiling wives, if they happen to have such a bit of machinery in the
house.Senator Cobb, however, possessed many of the qualifications of the
successful politician, one of which he displayed in the tact he
employed with Alice Copeland on that night when he first met her. For,
during the play, seeing that she was absorbed, he contented himself
with looking at her. But at the little supper afterwards, whither they
betook themselves, he made himself exceedingly agreeable for an old
gentleman--Alice had a better light on him then--and she was grateful
to him for taking such an interest in her and her simple affairs.Had Alice been less modest or more self-conscious, she might have
seen that several, other than Senator Cobb, fixed their eyes on the
fresh-complexioned girl in the front of the box who sat so still and
followed the play with such breathless interest, among them the same
tall young woman with auburn hair who had travelled with her from
Stockbridge. She watched Alice through her opera-glasses, and seemed
bored by her companions, but
Alice was too far off and too much absorbed to recognize her.The next morning, just as they were leaving for the boat, a great
box from the florist's was sent to Alice with Senator Cobb's card in
it. She gave a little cry of delight when she opened it. Instead of
roses, it was filled with spring flowers--crocuses, jonquils,
hyacinths, lilies-of-the-valley, heliotrope, and mignonette. The very
breath of spring came with it, and rose and floated out through the
room."What a nice old gentleman!" she said to her father, who was
bending over the flowers scarcely less enchanted than she. "But what
shall I do with them?""Oh, we must take them with us. See how they seem to watch us out
of their little faces. Flowers are almost human, Alice, especially
these baby spring flowers. Of course we must take them."So their way to the boat was traced by a very small black man
bearing a very large white box, which was deposited with more care and
far more minute instructions than they bestowed upon their
luggage. Then they went on deck and leaned over the railing, watching
the boat put off from her pier, and steam her slow way between all the
other craft, in the first stage of her beautiful journey up the
Hudson.IVALICE AND KATE VANDEVOORTELDERLY admirers with unctuous manners and an oily skin can make
themselves very revolting to sensitive young ladies with romantic
tendencies. It was on this journey that the mentally dwarfing fact was
forced even upon Alice Copeland's unsuspicious nature that Senator
Cobb--her "nice old gentleman"--had sent her those flowers in the
guise of a suitor. This startling discovery so upset Alice's usually
gentle equilibrium that the lovely journey was completely spoiled for
her--in point of fact, she saw none of its beauties.No one knows what the senator said to her. The only evidences of
her discomfort to be seen were the scarlet cheeks and downcast eyes of
the girl while Senator Cobb was talking to her. He must have given her
quite plainly to understand his intentions concerning her, as elderly
admirers with large fortunes have a little way of doing, for the
moment she could escape from him she hurried to his box of flowers, and, watching for a
favorable moment, she nerved herself to the ordeal of throwing the
whole thing overboard in the wake of the steamer.Alice thought no one had seen her, for it was near dusk, but a tall
young woman with auburn hair was sitting in the shadow and watching
her with amused eyes. Evidently she was clever at understanding
situations, for she clapped her gloved hands softly together, and
whispered "Good" under her breath, and half rose as if to go to the
girl, then sank back in her place, shaking her head as if at her own
folly.Alice Copeland was an odd girl. She could nerve herself to a
display of spirit like the flinging of that box of flowers away, but
she could not bring herself to tell her father why. When he discovered
their loss and asked after them in much the same tone of anxiety he
would have used if Gifford had disappeared, Alice admitted that she
had thrown them overboard."Thrown them overboard? Why, Alice, child, what is the matter with
you? Are you ill? To throw flowers overboard! Why didn't you give them
to some one? Why didn't you tell me? I would have removed them.""They smelled too sweet," said Alice, with a show of petulance
quite foreign to her.She looked suspiciously at her father to see if he knew of any
cause, but he, being a man, had seen nothing. He regarded her
anxiously, however, and felt her hands to see if she were
feverish.Their arrival at West Point was likewise marred for Alice in that
George did not prove the haven of refuge that she had hoped, but both
he and his father seemed pleased to allow Senator Cobb to look after
her wraps and to constitute himself her escort. This willing
acquiescence on their part so wrought upon Alice, together with the
fatuous attentions of the senator, that she lost what little
self-control she ordinarily possessed, and allowed her anxiety to be
seen plainly in her face.That evening, when the commandant and many of the cadets flocked to
Cozzens's to call upon the visitors, Alice was handed about from one
to another of her father's friends, meeting them mechanically, bowing
to them like an automaton, and all the time wishing herself well back
in Stockbridge. She felt that she could even endure the obnoxious
attentions of Frank Overshine, who would wear
hats so large for him that they touched his ears. She thought
indulgently of his wide mouth--the kind of a mouth which always goes
with a frank, open countenance and that sort of a hat--when she
compared his capabilities of being snubbed into faint-heartedness with
the confident smile of
Senator Cobb and his deadly habit of "washing his hands in invisible
soap," which so held Alice's eyes that she could not leave off looking
at them.She had been cornered by the senator all that first evening. She
had seen the gray-coated cadets pass to and fro. She had met a number
of her brother's friends. She had answered fully fifty times the
question as to what kind of a journey she had, with a mechanical "Very
pleasant, thank you," and had said "yes" to another fifty who wanted
to know if this was her first visit to West Point. She remembered none
of their names. The cadets all looked alike to her. It seemed to her
as though there were hundreds of white duck trousers and gray coats
with brass buttons. She said over and over that she had seen nothing
of West Point, but she thought she should like it very much. And the
young fellows who asked her these intelligent questions were somewhat
puzzled by her pleading blue eyes, and it almost stirred one or two of
them to promise to do anything for her if she would only speak out and
tell them what she wanted. And all the time her father and George were
near by and saw nothing of her distress, and all the time Senator Cobb
stood guard at her elbow and allowed no one to displace him, until
suddenly into the room walked a tall young woman in a white dress with yellow roses at her belt
and one against her bronze hair. She seemed to know everybody, bowing
and smiling with perfect ease and unconcern to those who thronged
around her, but moving slowly yet surely to where Alice Copeland sat
with her wistful eyes drinking in the beauty of the new-comer, who
finally paused just in front of her, looking down and smiling in such
a frank and friendly way that Alice flushed and rose to her feet and
smiled back at her quite as if she had known her always.Senator Cobb rose also, and stood with his hands under his
coat-tails and a nervous smile on his face."The senator will not introduce us, you see, Miss Copeland, because
he knows that I have come to usurp his place and to talk to you
myself; but on the whole, he shall be punished for monopolizing you,
and shall be obliged to be the means of his own discomfiture, as my
old black mammy used to make her little children go and cut the
switches they presently were to be whipped with. Pray present us,
Mr. Senator."She paused and looked down at Senator Cobb from her greater height,
and smiled brilliantly while waiting with her head rather haughtily
poised.The senator recognized her attitude and flushed as he said:
"Delighted, I'm sure. Miss Copeland, allow me to present Miss
Vandevoort."Miss Vandevoort took both of Alice's hands in hers, and sat down
beside her in the senator's chair."Thank you, dear Senator Cobb," she said, sweetly. "Now will you go
and talk to Mrs. Verry and let me tell Miss Copeland who I am?"She looked after his retreating figure, and laughed mischievously
as she saw Alice's bewildered face."My dear," she said, leaning towards her with an engaging air, "you
should be a little older to understand just how deliciously malicious
we two have been to each other.""Malicious?" said Alice. "How?""Should you really care to know? Wouldn't it be better for you to
go on having life present itself pictorially, or do you care for the
seamy side of the canvas?"Miss Vandevoort was watching her narrowly. She knew just how much
of a risk was involved in trying the intelligence of a Madonna-faced
girl like Alice Copeland. Too often she had drawn a blank.But a flash of comprehension swept over Alice's countenance as she
said, "I want the seamy side.""It is not beautiful, nor so innocent as the picture side.""But it is more interesting. It is better to know it," answered
Alice."More interesting, certainly; and better to know it at my age;
hardly at yours.""But let me begin with this, anyway. Tell me just how there was
anything malicious in what I saw," urged Alice, not quite
understanding how she dared to talk so freely, yet confident that her
freedom was welcome to Miss Vandevoort."You could not see below the surface?""Not at all. I am very stupid, I suppose.""No, not stupid; for this was very subtle and very trivial--not
worth a sentence of this talk; but I'll tell you if you care to
know. In the first place Senator Cobb had monopolized you to an extent
not permissible in polite society, and, in spite of coming from a
small town in Ohio, he was conscious that he had brazened out the
well-bred efforts of three or four people who saw your flag of
distress and tried to dislodge him. Then when I came and insisted, as
only a woman can, and he saw defeat staring him in the face, he
introduced me to you, instead of you to me--which, as I said before,
is a mere bagatelle--but I spiked his guns again by saying that if he
would leave us I would tell you who I was. Then to add insult to
injury, I sent him to Mrs. Verry, who paid him such marked attention
all last winter that people in Washington were driven to wondering if
her intentions were honorable.""Driven to wondering what?""Oh, driven to wondering if anything would come of it. You see she is quite prononcée, and the affections of such a
woman as that are not to be trifled with with impunity."Alice relaxed and laughed. There was something very alluring about
Miss Vandevoort's daring words, contrasted with her voice and
manner. She seemed to be amused at everything. She reviewed everybody
in the room for Alice's benefit, telling her who and what they
were. Suddenly she turned to the girl, whose reserve seemed completely
to have vanished under her raillery, and said, "Frank Overshine would
have bored me to death talking of you if what he said had not
interested me.""Frank Overshine?" said Alice, coloring and drawing off."Yes. You see I know more about you than you do about me. I have
been in Stockbridge for three days. I went down on a queer errand. I
captured my brother John's children and took them down to Cousin
Mollie Overshine's. You know Emily is getting a divorce from John, for
which Heaven be praised. She had the children. John wanted
them. Couldn't get them. Lawyers couldn't get them. Court couldn't get
them. Emily is sharper than a dozen of John's lawyers. I said nothing,
but I watched my chance, and when Emily went out one day I picked up
the little tots and whisked them down to Stockbridge before
anybody could wink. There was
nobody else to do it, so I did it. I always have to do things that
nobody else will do. The children were delighted to go with me. I
could have taken them to Africa--they would have gone. I had to send
to your house to get Cousin Mollie the evening I arrived, do you
remember?""I remember the evening Mrs. Overshine was at our house and was
sent for, but I was not there.""True. I remember now Frank told me that he had you that
evening.""But another girl was with us," said Alice, eagerly, trying to
disclaim young Overshine's ownership."So Frank said," answered Miss Vandevoort in a tone so droll that
Alice was obliged to smile rather against her will. She disliked to
make a jest of anything so serious as a love affair. She was very
young."Poor Frank," sighed Miss Vandevoort in mock sympathy. "He is in a
very bad way. His symptoms are quite aggravated. But it is a first
attack."Alice was silent with embarrassment and displeasure. She wondered
how so radiant a creature as Miss Vandevoort could--could talk in this
flippant way. It seemed to her Stockbridge sensibility almost
indelicate."He is so hopeless about you too. How can you bring yourself to flirt with him if you mean to
take him in the end?""Take him?" cried Alice, hotly. "I never thought of such a
thing!""Ah, that was what I wanted to know," answered Miss Vandevoort,
calmly. "I wondered if it were a preferred suitor which made you treat
poor Senator Cobb so cavalierly."Alice was almost ready to cry with vexation. She felt as powerless
to help herself with Miss Vandevoort as she had with the senator."You are flying another signal of distress," said Miss
Vandevoort. "If the senator sees it he will come and dislodge me."Alice's hands flew to her scarlet cheeks in sudden fear, and she
stole a look around the room as if to locate the senator and the
nearest door."Look here, my dear," said Miss Vandevoort, sitting up very
straight and closing her fan. "Don't look so wretched. Don't allow
situations to overpower you so. You are here, and unless you rise to
the occasion you are going to miss all the pleasure your father has
tried to give you, and you are going to allow these other girls to
wrest the victory from you which you may have if you will. Now I have
only been jesting with you, to try your mettle and to get my own
bearings. Pull yourself together and get command of the situation, and
I will give you the best time
you ever had in your life. You will have so many beaux that you won't
be able to manage them.""I don't want then," said Alice, quickly. "I shouldn't know what to
do with them. It would make me most unhappy.""Is it so?" said Miss Vandevoort, slowly. "Well, I never thought of
that possibility. I wonder what would have become of me if I had been
brought up in Stockbridge.""I do not like young men," said Alice. "They are so--so foolish. I
would much rather talk to you occasionally, and let the other girls
triumph over me if they want such a small victory as that would
be."Miss Vandevoort sat looking at her fan, and only nodded her head
slowly in reply. Alice went on."Let Mrs. Verry have Senator Cobb, and let the other girls have the
cadets--they all look bewilderingly alike to me--and whenever you want
me to enjoy myself you come and talk to me. It is a good deal to ask,
but you are so kind as to say that you want me to have a good time,
and that is what I should like best."Miss Vandevoort looked at Alice Copeland with interest. Yes,
without doubt, she was the prettiest girl in the room, and she had
about her a little well-bred air, which just missed being
Quakerish by the spirited
lift of her head, and just missed being vivacious by the subduing
effects of Presbyterianism and Stockbridge, Pennsylvania. People often
said of this quite satisfactory combination, "What a little lady Alice
Copeland is.""But you must dance to-morrow night at the hop," said Miss
Vandevoort."What hop?""What hop? Oh,shades of my Puritan ancestors! What a bit of rural
verdure it is! Why, the graduates' hop--the hop of the year--the hop
all these Baltimore and Washington and New York girls have come up
for--and the hop they all think you came for.""Well, if I go I suppose that George will dance with me once or
twice, and my father will take me in to supper, so that is all that is
necessary--it is all I care for," said Alice."But your first hop at West Point? Why, child, some girls would
give their two eyes and their two ears to be in your shoes.""Would they? And do you care so much for such things? Why do you
come?""I? Oh, I--I come because--I come because--because I like the
army. I like to see the young fellows," said Miss Vandevoort, coloring
and moving her head restlessly."Then you must know nearly everybody here," said Alice."I do. I know them all, I think.""Well, are they all as much alike as they look?"Alice's confidential tone amused Miss Vandevoort, and she
laughed."No, indeed. Some are quite different. Some are really
charming. There is one whom I am especially fond of."Miss Vandevoort's frankness did not shock Alice this time. She
looked more like a goddess to the girl than a woman, anyway. Alice
only wondered who the fortunate young fellow could be, whom Miss
Vandevoort would distinguish by so great a compliment as to declare
herself fond of him. It was not that she seemed so much older either,
which made her speech sound perfectly proper. It was more that she
seemed a degree removed from all the rest, and in some way
privileged. She had the confidence, in her daring, of an acknowledged
belle, which in itself is a charm unless allowed to be stupidly
prominent. Miss Vandevoort seemed to have the natural art of only
delicately suggesting this, by the nice way in which she appeared to
impart it to each one as an appeal to the subtlety of his
intelligence, which invited him to catch this clue that she threw out
and to make the most of it."Is he here to-night?" asked Alice, with more curiosity than she
yet had shown about anybody.Just then Miss Vandevoort looked up and bowed to him."No," she said, frankly doctoring the truth for the sake of the
future. She held Alice's eyes with hers while she made an
imperceptible movement of her fan, which the young man promptly
obeyed. As he made his way slowly towards them Miss Vandevoort said to
Alice:"Now I wonder if you will prove equal to this situation. Senator
Cobb is becoming restless under the caressing glances of the brilliant
Verry, and he contemplates returning to the charge here. I have
defended you all I can, but I will introduce one of the dearest
fellows on earth to you, and if you are not clever enough to hold him
here, Senator Cobb will get you again, and if you let him, I wash my
hands of you. The best way to recommend this young man to so difficile a person as yourself is to guarantee that
he is different. He graduates third from the head of his class and he
is first captain of the corps of cadets. No such colossal glory as the
latter will ever come to him in after years should he even become
President. Ah, here you are! Captain Counselman, allow me to present
you to Miss Copeland, the daughter of that most charming man, Judge
Copeland, and the sister of your classmate. Probably you will not be
allowed to remain unmolested long, as I have had daggers driven into me by the black eyes of
Mr. Drake for the last ten minutes. He is even now glaring at me from
the doorway, so hold the fort while you may, for there is no telling
when you may be routed by the enemy."When Alice ventured to raise her eyes above the brass buttons on
his coat, he was half smiling at Miss Vandevoort and half frowning at
Drake. Then he turned and looked down at her.She afterwards wondered if it were that he really did stand
straighter than all the others, or that he was taller, or that there
was that look from his gray eyes under their level brows, or what it
was that made her forget George, and her father, and Senator Cobb and
Drake, and even Miss Vandevoort, and only remember that a face had
come into her life which would remain with her, sleeping or waking,
wherever she went, crowding everything in the world into a background
for just this one face--the face of "the dearest fellow on earth," and
one who was "different."VBREAKFAST AT COZZENS'SMUCH to Alice's bewilderment the next morning, as she and her
father walked into breakfast, she saw people bowing to her whom she
had no recollection of meeting and whose names were a sealed
book. Their table was the one farthest from the door, and to reach it
they had to run the gantlet of the whole dining-room.Mrs. Verry, in a brilliant scarlet dress, had the first table,
which commanded a fine view of the door, and gave her an excellent
opportunity to waylay any whom she chose to entice. Beside her plate
lay a small bunch of red carnations. Everything about her was so
intense that it almost made you wink."Who was that impossible person who bowed to us, daughter?" asked
her father."A Mrs. Verry," answered Alice."An excellent name; quite a hit indeed."Hardly were they seated before they saw Miss Vandevoort appear at the door, and stop to speak to
the head waiter, who pointed to three or four tables; but Miss
Vandevoort shook her head. She nodded carelessly to Mrs. Verry, and
bowed more cordially to one or two others, but it was quite evident
that she was searching for some one. It was also evident from the way
her face lighted up and a smile of recognition flashed over it, that
it was Alice Copeland whom she was seeking, because she motioned to
the head waiter, who bent himself double and preceded her, snapping
his fingers at the other waiters, much as a ring-master cracks his
whip at a horse which is doing the best it can already, for no
especial reason except to call attention to his authority.Arrived at the Copelands' table, she calmly seated herself next
Alice in the chair reserved for Senator Cobb, giving the waiter to
understand, in more ways than one, that it would be worth his while to
obey her and to hold his tongue."If I were an artist I should paint you as Aurora, mademoiselle,"
said Judge Copeland. "Isn't she the radiant morning personified,
daughter?""Oh, fie, Judge! You mustn't turn my head with your flattery.""If I can only succeed in turning it in my direction, you place a
premium on what you term flattery," answered the judge,
gallantly.Miss Vandevoort clapped her hands softly."How lovely!" she cried. "Judge Copeland, you put some of these
unattached men to shame with the grace of your pretty speeches. Alice
will have to go home and tell her mother that she saw Kate Vandevoort
fall an easy victim to your blandishments."Alice looked from one to the other. Such meaningless words, yet how
different they seemed from other breakfast-table talk she could think
of, and how excellently they raised everybody's spirits!"How is your mother feeling on this fine day?"Kate's brilliant face clouded over."Poor little Mamma! She is not well this morning, and I made her
promise to lie still, and let me serve her breakfast later. She never
eats the American breakfast, you know. And I like to carry her rolls
and coffee to her myself. When she is ill, I am conceited enough to
think that she likes it better if she takes it from me. There are only
two of us left, you know, Judge, with John married, and the girls in
Europe, and we have a little way of flattering each other by a great
deal of petting, which, if we were all at home, would have to be
scattered over the whole family. As it is, we concentrate it all on
two. It is a sort of Liebig's Extract of Affection that we live
on."Waves of color came into her face as she talked of her mother, and
softened it and made it even more lovely.Alice was enchanted. She had been dazzled by Miss Vandevoort's
brilliancy, but that one speech made it seem possible for her
adoration to change into personal love, a much friendlier and more
comfortable affair, as everybody knows who has tried both."Dear me, Alice, quickly! Watch the flamingo!""Flamingo!" said Alice. "Where is it?""I mean Mrs. Verry, my dear. There comes Senator Cobb, and he wants
to come to this table, but she wants him there; that's why she took
that table. I wonder if she will get him. Yes, she's landed him this
time. No, he only stopped to speak. See how annoyed she looks. Oh,
fie, Mrs. Verry, your natural color, when you are angry, does not
harmonize with that you have put on out of your little box. Don't
watch her so, my dear. It flatters her. Look into your plate and watch
her through your eyelashes. Dear, dear, isn't she furious, and doesn't
she hate us! Ah, good-morning, my dear Senator. Are you coming to our
table? How very nice! See, you shall have this seat next to me, and I
shall have the pleasure of handing you the fruit myself. How well you
look this morning. Late hours do not seem to affect you in the least. Your freshness quite puts
the rest of us to the blush."The senator looked a little bewildered, but happy. He was at the
age when, while he might have his preferences, flattery from any young
woman upset him completely.Miss Vandevoort's attentions to him during breakfast were really
beautiful. She quite monopolized him, and pouted so frankly when he
tried to talk across her to Alice that he was reduced to a powder of
delight."Who is that beautiful woman?" asked Judge Copeland, as Miss
Vandevoort bowed and kissed her fingers to a lady seating herself at
the next table and facing them. She had snow-white hair, blue eyes,
and the fresh, pink complexion of Alice herself."That is Mrs. Counselman," answered Kate, still smiling at her.Alice's heart leaped, and she listened breathlessly for the next
words."And that is her husband with her. Are they not a distinguished
pair? Their son graduates this year, and a finer fellow never
breathed. Mark my words, young Counselman will be heard from. I don't
know why I say this, but I feel, whenever I am near him, that I am
with the heart of a hero. His face follows me like the faces of some
pictures in the
Luxembourg. There is a haunting quality in it, which gives me a
feeling that Destiny has already laid her hand upon his brow. It is
foolish to allow one's thoughts to wander in that way, but I am glad
the war is over. If it were not, he would lay down his life for some
one, and perhaps nobody would ever hear of it. He might be shot
carrying some wounded comrade from the field when the battle was all
over. The heroism would be his, but not the	glory."Alice bit her lip and clenched her hands in her lap. She was afraid
that she was going to cry before them all. What could Miss Vandevoort
mean?"His father is a most charming man. He got that sabre-cut at
Gettysburg. He is a man of scholarly tastes and writes exquisite
verse. To go into his library is to go into his life. But the
Counselmans are a race of soldiers. His great-grandfather fought in
the Revolution, and was killed at the battle of Brandywine. I shall
say nothing of Mrs. Counselman. Her lovely face is her introduction to
a man like yourself, Judge.""Thank you, my dear. Will you do me the honor to present me to them
after breakfast?""With much pleasure. Oh, what exquisite roses! Look, Alice."Senator Cobb leaned back in his chair with a satisfied smile upon
his face, as everybody turned
to watch the head waiter coming down the room bearing a glorious
bouquet of roses, which almost concealed him from view."They are for Miss Copeland," said the senator, rubbing his hands
together.Alice half rose from her chair in childish but indignant
protest."Sit down," whispered Miss Vandevoort, twitching her dress under
the table. But Kate frowned a trifle as she realized that there sat
Mrs. Counselman, the mother of Gordon Counselman,who would see Alice
receive so marked an attention from another. Kate's prehensile brain
realized the subtlety of the situation. She knew that there was
nothing like nipping these things in the bud."Oh, Senator Cobb!" she said, raising her voice a trifle. She
reached out for the roses and they were placed in her hands. "Do let
me give them to her," she murmured in the senator's ear."Certainly," he said, pleased at the sensation he had created, and
delighted to see everybody craning their necks to watch Miss
Vandevoort, with her face buried in the flowers, smiling and nodding
at Senator Cobb, and apparently thanking him."Aren't they beautiful, Alice? And isn't the senator too kind and
thoughtful for any use? But I feel dreadfully left out in the cold."
She pretended to shiver, and looked reproachfully at the senator, who was so delighted at her
raillery that he couldn't wash his hands fast enough. He stopped
gurgling long enough to say,"But, my dear young lady, just wait until dinner, and see what you
will receive. You never know what a day may bring forth.""With you around, that is quite true. You are like a fairy
godfather, always dropping sugar-plums to your friends. But mind it is
larger than this," she whispered, "or I shall be dreadfully
jealous."He nodded and chuckled and churned himself almost into hysteria
with the intoxication of Miss Vandevoort's manner. It takes moral
courage in a man to be true to one woman, if another woman has pitted
her charms against him."These are yours, Alice dear. What shall I do with them?" said Miss
Vandevoort, holding them towards her, but not offering to relinquish
them. Alice drew back as if their odor sickened her."Oh, don't," she implored. "Keep them. Throw them away. Or no, wait
a moment. Senator Cobb, are these flowers mine to do as I please
with?""Certainly, my dear young lady. Certainly. Throw them away--throw
them into the Hudson River, if you wish!" He chuckled again at this
absurdity, and Miss Vandevoort coughed gently."Then I think I will send a few of them to your mother, Miss
Vandevoort, if you think she would care for them. Mrs. Vandevoort is ill this morning,
Senator Cobb."Tears came into the senator's eyes at this exhibition of his
lady-love's exquisite thoughtfulness. How little some men know the
signs! If some one else had sent those roses, Mrs. Vandevoort might
have had flowers sent to her, but they would not have been these.In some way Kate Vandevoort walked out of the dining-room, at
Senator Cobb's side, carrying Alice Copeland's flowers in her
arms. And when presently she gave up guard-mounting, against the
clamoring of a dozen importunate friends, in order to be with her
mother at breakfast, she still had those flowers, all of which Alice
had thrust upon her in a frenzy of gratitude.VIGUARD-MOUNTINGMANY people, of wide experience in other matters, absolutely deny
the existence of love at first sight. They lay great stress upon the
impossibility of such an occurrence, and point with pride to the fact
that they are bank presidents, or treasurers of orphan asylums, or
aldermen, to give weight to their opinions.These facts silence, but do not convince. Men have been known to
deny the possibility of a new world, and even while they were denying
it most stridently, some one, who believed, sailed away and found it,
thus proving it beyond a peradventure. Just as, in the midst of these
discussions, men and women are sailing away and discovering new worlds
in each other's eyes, leaving those of us who are slow of heart to
shut out the sight, if we are provincial, and loudly to declare that
we do not believe in this new world because we have not sailed, and
because we have not found it.Be that as it may, Gordon Counselman, on that eventful night when he looked down into Alice
Copeland's blue eyes, felt his heart give an unmistakable leap under
his tight gray coat, and something in his throat rose up and choked
him and he could not speak for a moment, but stood looking down at
her, alone with her for aught he saw or heard of others, and feeling
that a girl who could look up at a fellow like that was enough to turn
West Point back to the starting-place for all the world--the Garden of
Eden--so called, perhaps, because two lovers were there alone with
nobody to bother them or ask them to make up a set.Young Counselman was no philosopher. He was simply a clean-minded
fellow who fell in love as naturally and as gladly as only a
chivalrous nature can, and who experienced as many pangs of
unhappiness and doubt as always assail one in a first passion, but
never with quite the same vernal poignancy as when it happens to come
in one's youth, before one has had much time to note or discuss the
symptoms in others. And not being a philosopher, he lived through
these glories, frankly and unsuspiciously doing and saying the same
things which millions of human beings had done before him, ingenuously
believing that he was the first to discover just this delirious
quality in the joy of love, betraying himself in a hundred little ways
to any observant eyes, but utterly untormented by pa-gan doubts as to the genuineness or duration of
this delightful state, such as occasionally will intrude themselves
upon more experienced minds.To those who are addicted to the unfortunate habit of analyzing,
perhaps it is as sincere a test as any of the reality of a passion
that one does believe one's self to be a pioneer in this line. And the
fatuous questions lovers ask each other--whether any two people were
ever so happy before, or if anybody ever loved with just the same
largesse, or thought the same things, or felt such generous spasms of
self-denial raging to be tested--prove even to the analytical that
they are sailing over hitherto unknown waters towards the new world,
which may not be just as their fancy painted it, but which is
unmistakably strange and different, and at least brings the joy, at
which even philosophers dare not cavil, of being the waking reality of
all their inarticulate and half-formed dreams.Of course Gordon Counselman did not discover all his capabilities
in this direction during that first sleepless night when he thrashed
around, wakeful, and confidently happy, ready to declare in the
morning that he had not slept a wink, yet bearing in his radiant face
the manifest signs of having been refreshed by what few lapses into
unconsciousness he had been unable to take account of.Twelve hours of being violently in love will teach a man more of the subject than all the novels he
ever read. And from being as heart-whole the evening before as ever a
youth was, barring a few pangs laid to the account of Miss Kate
Vandevoort, who had constantly to switch the attentions of the cadets
from herself to younger girls, Gordon Counselman emerged from his
quarters the next morning honestly feeling a year older and confident
that he had run the whole gamut of human emotion from the lowest depth
of bass despair to the highest treble of hope and faith. Cold gray
daylight found him at neither extreme, but somewhere in the middle,
with some uneasiness, some hope, and a great deal of determination. It
is queer what a curious effect daylight has on love, and odd how many
of the kinks the moon puts in that the sun takes out.He was in such exuberant spirits, however, just to realize that she
was here at West Point, breathing the same air, looking at the same
river, treading the same ground, and that in an hour, perhaps half an
hour, at almost any moment he might see her, that when he met Pratt,
even though he knew Pratt wanted to borrow money, he hailed him with
an enthusiasm of which Pratt was not slow to avail himself.Gordon even allowed himself to be drawn into talk about it,
although he had not a cent to lend, and really, except that his credit
was good, was one of the most
useless persons for Pratt to attempt. Gordon's kind heart, however,
smote him for withholding his sympathy from so harassed a fellow as
Pratt looked, and he thought perhaps if it were only a trifling scrape
that he might see some way out of it.Pratt realized the value of having at last got Counselman's ear,
into which, to his honor be it said, no woes were ever poured in
vain.It was but a small thing in itself, only a question of a few
hundred dollars; but to a cadet with no income of his own it was what
the national debt would seem to a private citizen."But Pratt, old fellow, tell me how it came to be so much?" said
Gordon, anxiously.Pratt wriggled and colored, but finally, after one long look into
Gordon's eyes, which had a trust-worthiness in them which no one could
mistake, thrust his hands between his knees and said with dogged
determination:"I'll tell you the whole thing, Counselman. I wasn't going to, but
you've had the decency not to kick a fellow when he is down, and I'll
just tell you. I got into debt over a woman--flowers and candy and
truck. I'm in love with her. You needn't grin. You don't know what it
is. But just you wait till some girl gets you in her clutches, and
you'll be ready to sell your chevrons to get her a piece of the moon if she wants it. Mine is that
kind. Other fellows give her the most expensive things and I've had
to, or be left out of the race. I couldn't stand that, so I kept on
till my credit was gone, and the governor shut down on me
besides. Then I was in a hole. I've only been able to borrow small
amounts of the other fellows, because I couldn't tell them this that
I'm telling you, and when I paid some, of course they let me run those
cursed bills a little higher. But long ago they stopped that and began
hounding me besides. Now they are threatening to send them to the
commandant. If they do, you know it's all up with me, and, by Jove! it
will be the end of me too. I promise you that.""What! Do you mean that you'd be such a coward as to wear a wooden
overcoat if you don't graduate?""It isn't that!" cried Pratt, raising his
head from his hands. "I'd lose the girl!""Oh," said Gordon. Then he added, "I haven't got any money.""No," said Pratt, eagerly, "but you've got credit, and I have made
all the arrangements. If you will just indorse my note they will take
it, and I can take care of the interest.""Why will they take my name instead of trusting you?""Why, you have kept your credit good and mine is all knocked into smithereens. Anyhow, I
asked them, and they said your name would be all right if you'd give
it to me.""Well, I'll do that, certainly, and be glad to. Of course it's only
a guarantee that you will do your part, and I am not afraid that you
won't.""Counselman, you--you're the best fellow that I know, by Jove! And
I'll never forget this as long as I live. You don't know what a load
you have taken off my mind. I declare I could hardly breathe
before. Now I can begin to enjoy her being here."He wrung Gordon's hand twice."I'm going to marry her, Counselman, and I'd like you for best
man. Will you?""Why, has it gone as far as that?" laughed Gordon."We are not engaged yet," admitted Pratt. "But she has given me to
understand that she will marry me as soon as I graduate.""I hope she won't miss the flowers.""Oh, I can't stop sending them now! I've got to keep it up a little
longer.""Why, old man, are you in earnest? If you are thinking of marrying
her, surely you are not going to add to your debts for your
dowry.""I've got to, if I keep in with her.""Nonsense, old fellow. Just tell her you can't afford it. She will
respect you for it, if she really cares for you.""Well, you might be able to tell your girl if you had one, and it
would go, but it's different with me, and different with
Mrs. Verry.""Mrs. Verry!" exclaimed Gordon."Certainly. What's the matter? Didn't you know who it was? I
suppose you think it is queer that such a brilliant woman would
condescend to marry a fellow like me. But she says she loves me,
Counselman.""Mrs. Verry!" repeated Gordon, as if unable to get it through his
head. He wanted to say a dozen things, but it is rather difficult to
look a fellow in the face and say that the woman he loves is years
older than himself and that he believes her to be the worst kind of a
flirt besides."It is not to be mentioned at present, Counselman. I have told only
you.""All right, old fellow. I--I'm really too surprised to say
anything.""I don't wonder," said Pratt, with unwonted humility.When he was alone Gordon drew a long breath and shook his
head. Then he put the matter out of his mind and went to hunt up
George Copeland. He and George had been great friends, much to every
one's surprise, but Gordon wanted to view him now in the new light of
being Alice Copeland's brother. He sighed to think that if he only
had known Alice sooner, what
hours he could have spent asking George questions about her. He forgot
that George probably would not have answered them. Brothers seldom are
willing to sacrifice themselves to that extent, and George Copeland
was unusually taciturn. Indeed, it was one of the problems of West
Point why the most popular cadet there should have selected so
cross-grained and quick-tempered a man for his best friend as George
Copeland.They really had not selected each other. It was one of those
inevitable friendships among men which women never can understand.Counselman was known to be set against fighting, and was a much
respected arbitrator in many a subaltern disagreement. Added to this
was the kindest heart in the world, which sometimes got him into
trouble. He knew that his classmate Copeland's greatest fault, and an
unforgivable fault at West Point, lay in attempting to take forty
winks in the morning after the bugle sounded. Copeland had been
reprimanded several times for being late, or for having something
wrong with his attire--for what man can dress properly on a mad run?
Counselman, not knowing George's surly temper, out of pure humanity
once thrust his head in at the door of Copeland's quarters and roared
out a warning, whereat George is said to have hurled a boot at
Gordon's head. That is where he made a mistake, for in less time than one could wink, Gordon
Counselman, the well-known peacemaker, had hauled George Copeland out
of bed and was thrashing him roundly; and when he had all but knocked
the breath out of George's astonished body, he politely invited him to
dress and take the rest of what he had in store for him.But George, being wide awake by that time, cordially refused, and
even apologized handsomely--partly for being thrashed and partly for
so unamiably rewarding Gordon's brotherly act--after which, of course,
they were the best of friends, and Gordon's authority as a peace-maker
became more respected than ever.But on this particular morning Gordon was not thinking of this
incident, nor of the fact that George only showed his sullen temper
nowadays after receiving a letter from his mother. If he had thought
of them he would have dismissed all such unpleasant intruders--for
Gordon's views of life were persistently rose-colored.He could not find George, however, who was engaged in
guard-mounting, but some girls found him and
held him a prisoner for an anxious half-hour which he had meant to
spend with Alice Copeland.It really would be a delightful, as well as a most instructive
thing, if a man occasionally could exchange places with the woman he
loves and view his actions through her eyes. Perhaps he might better understand her causeless
jealousies, her unreasonable way of holding him to account for quite
harmless diversions. He might see how the moments he spends with other
girls seem to lengthen into the basis of a quarrel--so different are
men's eyes from women's. It would benefit them in the same degree that
a year's travel benefits a provincial youth. He learns a new point of
view.Most men are provincial when they make love, but it is the
provincialism of those who give the matter no thought, and not of
bigotry.When Miss Vandevoort took her radiant face and her brilliant
flowers and her sweeping skirts from Alice's clinging view, the poor
girl felt bereft. Nevertheless she crept close to her father and
Mrs. Sheldon, the commandant's wife, and went with them to witness
guard-mounting with a beating heart.The martial spirit in her leaped out to meet the boys in gray as
they marched towards her, every eye to the front, every step taken
with such clock-like precision that it made her dizzy to watch
them. In vain she looked for Gordon Counselman. The brown faces under
their shakoes all looked alike to her, and she was sure if he had been
among them he would have looked different. The adjutant, covered with
gold lace, made a brave showing; but still he was not the one she
sought. Nevertheless there were moments
when the impressive spectacle before her drew her thoughts from him,
and left no room for anything except the majesty of the military; for
when, at the last, the old Officer of the Day turns the detail over to
the new Officer of the Day, and, making the salute--the most stately,
the most impressive of all--by removing his helmet and holding it with
matchless dignity to his left shoulder, so stands with bared head
while he passes out of office, Alice felt that it was worth while
being Officer of the Day just for the majestic manner in which he was
permitted to resign the office.Hardly, however, had the band struck up "The Girl I Left Behind
Me," and the detail marched away, when she saw Gordon Counselman in a
group of girls who seemed literally to be besieging him.It is one of the unanswered conundrums of life why the anger of a
lover rises to a white-heat at a similar display of his own mild
insanity in any one else. Alice instantly set those girls down as bold
and forward and unladylike; and many more such adjectives did she heap
upon them in the secret recesses of a heart which never before had
known a pang of jealousy in all its gentle existence. She was partly
consoled, however, by the unmistakable way in which his brown face
flushed when he saw her. She even gave him credit for an effort to
detach himself from the tenacious girls who surrounded him, for she distinctly saw him bow and
endeavor to withdraw; but they made such a little laughing clamor over
him, and coaxed him so prettily, and he was so evidently their hero as
well as hers, that a little sick thrill ran through her, and a film
came over the beauty of the scene, and she turned to look for her
father, and wanted to go back to Stockbridge where she couldn't see
him, or, at least, where she couldn't see him with other girls.But her father was not there and Senator Cobb was. He was making
for her too. But bearing down upon him like a revenue cutter was
Mrs. Verry. Alice smiled a wintry little smile of amusement. Thanks to
Miss Vandevoort's tutelage she was beginning to see below the surface,
and it looked to her like a human game of hare and hounds.She never knew the load of unhappiness that settled down upon
Gordon Counselman as he saw the rich senator from Ohio so palpably
appropriating Alice, and dampening the ardor which had been surging up
in his heart at the sight of her to the verge of bursting off some of
his shining buttons, as Peggotty was wont to shed hers under sudden
effervescence of affection.So those two foolish young people looked across at each other and
allowed the wrong people to monopolize them, and were frankly and
honestly miserable over the perversity
of fate or their own stupidity in not rising to the occasion. When,
finally, young Counselman made a dash for liberty, and asked her to
walk down old Flirtation with him in his only hour of leisure, Alice
said to him:"I've promised to go with Senator Cobb," in such a woebegone tone,
and with such a glance of aversion at the poor senator, that Gordon
was comforted a little in spite of his bitter disappointment."Stay and talk to me just a moment," he urged, frankly turning his
back on the senator and his claims.She colored so prettily with pleasure that Gordon was sure she
would; but just then her father said:"Come, daughter, Mrs. Sheldon wishes to go;" and with only one
backward glance full of acquiescence and longing to accept, Alice was
sandwiched between the unsuspicious Mrs. Sheldon and her father, and
taken back to the hotel, where, waiting for them, she found Kate
Vandevoort.Alice mentally flung herself upon Miss Vandevoort's mercy and into
her arms, telling her secret quite unsuspiciously with the desperate
words:"I promised to go to walk with Senator Cobb, and just afterwards,
when it was too late, Mr. Counselman asked me."Miss Vandevoort wrinkled her smooth brow in vexation for a moment,
then she threw back her head
and laughed her old laugh of amusement at the ways of people."Why do you laugh?" asked Alice."Because if I didn't, I should weep. Laughing keeps me on the
surface. But don't look so wretched, my dear." She took Alice's
flushed cheeks between her thumb and forefinger very daintily. "Let us
see if we cannot think of an antidote.""How good you are," murmured Alice. "I thought you would be vexed
at my stupidity. I'm such a little fool," she ended, with vicious
emphasis."I am glad you are beginning to realize it," said Miss Vandevoort,
with amazing coolness. "It is the first step towards reform. What made
you promise to go with Senator Cobb?""It came so suddenly. I had no excuse ready.""Why didn't you say you had an engagement?""Because it wouldn't have been the truth," said Alice, with the
unconscious rudeness of conscious virtue."Ciel!" said Miss Vandevoort under her
breath. "What a long way Stockbridge is from New York. Millions and
millions of miles. Don't look so mystified, child. Whenever you are
puzzled, nod your head with an air of intelligence calculated to
deceive even the elect. Then keep your ears open and the gullible
elect will straightway tell you all there is to know about it. When
you are unhappy, laugh. Laugh out loud,
show all your teeth--you have very pretty teeth and you can afford to
laugh even at poor jests. When you are with your sweetheart, don't
smile and look contented and happy. If you do, some jealous girl will
get him away from you. Look droopy and bored, so that people will not
envy you. You are a shining mark, my dear, with that face of yours
such a map of your emotions. If you can't do anything else, look
stupid. I wonder if you could--with those eyes? It is invaluable to be
able to look stupid. It disarms everybody. I always am so sorry for
people with really intellectual faces--people with long, scholarly
features, who can control only their expression. They always are
obliged to take the credit for what they know, and they are doomed to
be feared by the very ones they care most to attract. Now I am
different. Let me tell you a secret. My face is my fortune because it
does not betray me. I can look like a perfect fool, a puppet, the tool
of any designing man or woman. Look at me now. Do I look as if I could
spell 'necessary' and 'separate'? Shouldn't you think that I would
spell 'believe' and 'receive' alike, and that I should much prefer to
take my views on life from my husband? That is why I have such a good
time. I am clever and nobody knows it. Promise not to betray my
secret."Miss Vandevoort said this with such an engaging air, and with so
whimsical an expression, that Alice was ready to declare that she was
the funniest as well as the most fascinating woman she ever had met,
which, considering her narrow experience, was hardly as great a
compliment as she meant it to be."But to return to Senator Cobb. Much as I should dislike to he the
first one to set your feet in the downward path, I wish I could teach
you not to be quite so hopelessly truthful. Why, what's the matter? I
only mean that it is not necessary to tell all you think in order to
believe yourself honest. Tactlessness is not a virtue even if the
ignorant do dub it honesty. It is a downright crime. I wish I could
teach you to veil the truth with illusion--pure white
illusion--because the naked truth is shocking to the scrupulously
modest. Now, I am clever enough to know that I never can teach you to
do this well, and unless you can do it well it is much better to leave
it alone and just vulgarly to tell the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth, and let people hate you, as they surely
will. Nobody wants undiluted honesty, least of all, men. But the
mistake women make is in coloring the truth. They make it gray, and
gray is dull and unbecoming. Now when I color the truth I make it
red. Most men love red. It warms and
cheers, and my little pink and rose colored lies are among my greatest
charms. Why, my dear Alice, if I had told the brutal truth to
unattractive men all my life, I should be literally nowhere. I should
have been laid on the shelf long ago.""Yes, but," said Alice, flushing and laughing, "there was nothing
to do about Senator Cobb except to say, 'I don't want to go with you,'
and have it really true.""Well, why didn't you say that?""Because it would have hurt his feelings.""Precisely. I am glad to see that you do not want to hurt even
Senator Cobb's feelings. From the way you started to walk right across
the breakfast-table this morning in order to get rid of him, I was
afraid you were capable of anything. Never hurt any man's feelings. He
never forgets it. You took the other horn of the dilemma and made
yourself wretched. I have always thought of the Dilemma as a horned
sphinx. Now I am too selfish to impale myself on either horn. I avoid
both and seat myself calmly between them on her brow, where I remain
like a diadem. All my life I have been dodging bores and landing
clever men and floating in to shore on the high tide of success
without letting anybody catch me at my harmless little tricks, except
other women. I wouldn't let them if I could have helped myself. But
other women are sometimes too
much for me. I never wound a man's vanity. Believe me, Alice, it is
the best, the only safe way. Now make a bona fide engagement with me
to spend every spare moment with me which you do not care to spend
elsewhere. Do you promise? Well, now you can truthfully say, 'I have
another engagement.'"As Miss Vandevoort ceased speaking she watched Alice wistfully, as
though the absolute truthfulness of the girl appealed to her in a very
tender way, yet she mentally stamped it impossible. Miss Vandevoort's
heart and intellect generally warred in this way."But you haven't told me what to do," said Alice."Oh no. Well, let me think."She laid a finger on her lips, and, leaning forward, stood looking
at the toe of her little shoe with serious attention; and
unconsciously Alice, as most absorbed persons do, followed her
example, looking down and regarding it with equal heed. Presently a
light broke over Miss Vandevoort's face and she threw back her
head."I have it," she said. "Ask no questions, but put on your prettiest
frock, the one which fits the best in the back. All your gowns should
fit best in the back, for your back is at the mercy of the
observer. You can defend the front in fifty ways, but how do you know
what is going on behind you? A woman of
genius has the backs of her gowns faultless. Mine are! The fronts of
mine are plain. You never notice them, because I myself am the front
of a gown. Now listen. Near your prettiest and go with him. Keep your
wits about you and trust the rest to me.""I will, I truly will!" said Alice, impetuously. She stood looking
up into Miss Vandevoort's smiling, whimsical, magnetic face with the
dilated gaze of a fascinated child. Miss Vandevoort had captured her
imagination, and opened vistas in her own life, down which she looked
with a breathless thrill. The possibilities seemed so great. Perhaps
it was only one way Miss Vandevoort had of exercising her cleverness,
so lightly to talk with Alice as to banish her depression and nerve
her for her difficult talk. In this she had succeeded at any
rate. Alice's eyes of faith made her own almost wistful again."I believe," breathed Alice fervently, in a swift, exultant
comprehension of her changed spirits, "that you could almost raise the
dead, you are so wonderful and so much alive!"It was but an idle form of speech, a childish exaggeration; but her
smile froze as she saw the horror in Miss Vandevoort's face. Even her
brilliant scarlet lips grew pale under Alice's stricken gaze."Oh, what have I said?" cried Alice, springing towards her and
seizing her hand."Nothing. It is nothing. Only my heart. It troubles me at times,"
gasped Miss Vandevoort, recovering herself with a visible effort. She
rubbed her cheeks with both hands as if she realized their
whiteness.Alice watched the color creep back into her face, and Miss
Vandevoort bore her anxious gaze unflinchingly and smiled bravely. And
it was only after Alice, entirely reassured, had left her, that Kate
Vandevoort turned away, out of the sight of everybody, and covered her
trembling lips with her hands to keep down a bitter cry, murmuring
brokenly,"Raise the dead, did she say? O God, dear God, if I only
could!"VIIDOWN FLIRTATION WALK"I WONDER," said Miss Vandevoort to herself as she came out of the
hotel on the veranda and began idly to pace its length, apparently
absorbed in putting on her gloves, but in reality doing sentry duty,
"if it can be possible that these two young creatures are going to
care for each other, or am I deceived in the signs? If they were like
other people--if Gordon were as selfish as other young fellows--or if
Alice were as frivolous as other girls, I might think this were only a
passing attraction; but they are both so true. Heavens, how it brings
it all back! How will it end with them? They are both so young and so
unworldly. How hard it will go with either, if the other is not
seriously interested. I could easily bring myself to believe in both
of them if it did not seem too good to be true--and good things of the
heart come so seldom in this world. Gordon is too popular. If it is
possible to spoil him these girls will do it. Ah, bless the boy! I can't blame them. He is the
delight of my eyes. But if I let him know it, I shall be just as
unwise as they. I really pity these wonderfully attractive men, with
such a natural, irresistible charm as Gordon has. The poor fellows
have no chance to be modest and chivalrous. It is all our fault. Dear
me, I wonder if that difficult young person--Miss Alice Copeland, who
dislikes young men--has any idea of what a dear fellow Gordon
is. Well, I must see what I can do to stir things up. I can be very
annoying when I try. How do you do, Mr. Counselman? Am I not a wonder
to be ready ahead of time and actually waiting for so punctual a
person as yourself?""How lovely you look, Miss Vandevoort!" exclaimed the boy, looking
at her out of his smiling eyes with such frank admiration that she
colored."Oh, Gordon, you are impossible. There is no use trying to reform
you. Your honesty is so believable, and that is dangerous, even to a
case-hardened person like myself. I really catch myself trying to look
well for you! Now isn't that a dreadful admission, when I had just
determined never to say another thing to spoil you!"Gordon pulled off his shako and laughed such a boyish, hearty laugh
that two old ladies turned their heads and smiled at him. Alice
Copeland heard it, coming out of the parlor with Senator Cobb, and she took an involuntary step
forward, thereby losing what the senator was saying, and having to
listen to it all over again.What girl at a summer resort has not felt the misery of coming out
on the veranda with the wrong man, only to see the right man with
another girl? And if the other girl was having her glove buttoned at
just that particular moment, as Kate was, and your own soul's property
was bending over her hand--actually holding it, as everybody knows a
man has to do when he buttons a glove--and if the other girl was so
absorbed in the interesting process that she did not look up to bow,
or give him a chance to bow, and you had to go on down the steps,
chattering to this other man, who suddenly has become so hateful to
you that you almost wished he would trip on the steps and land on his
head--then you can truthfully say that you know what real misery
is.Kate felt a pang of sympathy for Alice as she caught her imploring
look and steadfastly "for the sake of the future" refused to answer
it. And she saw with genuine admiration the plucky way that Alice
gathered herself together and held her head high and chatted with the
senator."Ah, there goes Alice Copeland," said Kate, calmly."Where, where?" asked Gordon, dropping her hand and looking in all directions except the right
one."Why, down there. See?""Then come on," said Gordon, eagerly, picking up his helmet and
straightening himself."Come where?" asked Miss Vandevoort, innocently. "Are you going to
follow them?""Why no, of course not," he answered, awkwardly. "Only you
said--""I said that I would walk with you if you liked. Alice has an
escort. Look how well she carries herself. Dear me, how devoted the
senator seems. I wonder if she would marry him. Her mother would favor
it heart, soul, influence, and will power. To see her child a social
power in Washington. Dear, dear, how well she would like it. Did you
ever see Mrs. Copeland, Gordon?""No.""Ever see a picture of her?""No.""Well, if you ever see her, look at her nose. The history of the
Copeland family is written in the shape of Mrs. Copeland's nose. My
dear boy, if Napoleon could have seen it, he would have made her a
field-marshal.""Isn't Senator Cobb very rich?" asked Gordon, presently, with his
brows drawn into a straight line."I believe so. But the Copelands are richer.""Then perhaps Mrs. Copeland would not favor him as a suitor on that
ground.""It is power she covets, not wealth. Stern blue Presbyterian that
she is, she hankers after the flesh-pots of Egypt. She would like to
have the judge in the Cabinet, only he will not enter politics--grand
old gentleman that he is--and how she would revel in the social
despotism that would be hers."Kate watched him narrowly as she said these things. He looked after
Alice's retreating figure wistfully a moment, then squared his
shoulders, and the sunny look came back into his eyes, as he said:"If Alice Copeland is the girl I take her to be, she will marry the
man she loves.""Come on," said Kate, gayly. "I am ready now. Suppose we walk down
old Flirtation.""Why, we must have walked faster than they, for here we are almost
upon them," she said in her most guileless manner, ten minutes
later.Gordon looked down at her quizzically, but she looked back at him
with such innocence that he laughed aloud, and Alice turned around and
smiled at them."Wait for us!" cried Kate, swinging her parasol at them."What a darling you are!" whispered Gordon, audaciously."How disrespectful of you," said Kate. "What do you mean?"She looked so surprised that Gordon was abashed. He was so honest
himself that Miss Vandevoort's brilliant changes of base always
nonplussed him. But that astute young woman had no intention of openly
championing his cause until she felt her ground secure beneath her
feet."Senator Cobb," she said, when they all four stopped to speak, "do
you remember what I was telling you in Washington last month about
Mrs. Frederick's flirtation with Captain Connor of the navy?""Yes, yes, I remember," said the senator, eagerly, who dearly loved
a bit of gossip."Well, I know the rest of it now. Some time I'll tell you, if you
promise solemnly not to repeat it. But I wonder if I can trust
you?""Oh, indeed you can, my dear lady. I never speak of such
things. Was it as we thought?""Never mind now. I must not intrude upon your walk with Miss
Copeland. I'll tell you some time when you come up to New York.""Oh, I never can wait that long. Tell me now. Perhaps Miss Copeland
will walk with Mr. Counselman for a minute or two.""Well, come on, then. Leave them to follow. But mind you never
breathe this."And so for a blissful thirty minutes Gordon Counselman and Alice
followed in the wake of a bald head and a bronze head which were so
close together that when they met Mrs. Verry and Pratt, Mrs. Verry was
guilty of the indiscretion of turning to look after them.Miss Vandevoort made such good use of her time with the senator
from Ohio that he walked all the way back with her, and Alice joined
them only when Gordon dashed away to take part in dress-parade.Seldom does the parade-ground present so brilliant a sight as
during graduation week, when hosts of visitors and pretty girls and
proud relatives are gathered there to do homage to the most beautiful
sight in the world--a perfectly trained battalion on a perfect
parade-ground.The Board of Visitors was unusually imposing this year, and the
array of beautiful girls unusually attractive; but Alice, from the
moment she saw that parade form, forgot everything except that all
those men, with their apparently perfect uniforms and shining
equipments and faultless appearance, were not so perfect or so
faultless as Gordon, for he, her hero, was first captain of them
all.It was an impressive sight. The visitors made a bright spot of
color in front of the officers' quarters, with the old gray academy
buildings looming up on one
side, while away off at the other the grim barracks were aligned, in
front of which the companies were forming. The lovely Hudson flowed
softly beneath the bluff, visible beyond the Point like a curving band
of silver. The sunlight slanted across the smooth parade-ground,
glimmering on company after company of cadets in full-dress uniforms,
being marched up from their quarters by proud cadet officers, who
endeavored to look as if all this fuss-and-feathers was a good deal of
a bore to full-grown men, and never knowing that their ingenuous young
countenances hopelessly betrayed the fact that they loved every
unnecessary inch of red tape, and that they wouldn't have exchanged
places with civilians in dun-colored tweeds for all that this world
had to offer.The advancing column halted at a word, as motionless as
statues. Alice could see Gordon in the post of honor at the extreme
right. He was the first to step forward with a command to his
company. All the other cadet captains had to follow him. Then the band
marched out, as if to show themselves, and paraded down the front of
the column and back again, as much as to say, "Now, boys, watch
us. This is the way you want to march." How the girls loved that band!
They never could make up their minds which to prefer, the bearskin of
the drum-major or the gold-lace of the adjutant, who, just as soon as the band got back to their
places, gave a hoarse command, which nobody understood, because that
would have been unmilitary. Everybody obeyed it, however, because the
ranks opened and all the officers marched forward in front of their
companies and halted.Again the adjutant gave a hoarse cough, and all the long column
presented arms as if pulled by one string, while the officers
saluted. Then came the adjutants turn to subside for a while. Having
done all that could reasonably be expected of one man, he wheeled,
saluted the commandant, and said, in a more conversational tone, "Sir,
the parade is formed." At least the girls heard that. Two or three of
the liveliest mimicked his salute and touched their big leghorn hats
with their hands. It annoyed Alice. She thought it disrespectful, not
to say sacrilegious. She wished Gordon had been nearer, so that she
could see his face.The adjutant was at his post, and the commandant was putting the
men through a drill all too short to satisfy the voracious admiration
of the girls, who wished he had left them there indefinitely. The
stupid part of dress-parade to women is where the officers receive
reports and instructions. Everybody talks during this time. But when
the order came "Parade is dismissed," and the adjutant took his place
in the centre of the line of officers, who closed in upon him in front of the battalion, forming a
small and exclusive column, Gordon, as first captain, still at the
right, a sharp word of command came from the adjutant himself, and
then, oh, then the column of officers, with the band blowing itself
red in the face, marched up, up, up, like beautiful, live, human
machines, towards the commandant, standing in rigid and solitary
dignity, and towards the visitors, who applauded them mightily, and
towards the girls, who leaned forward with eyes blazing with
excitement and cheeks aflame with delight. Alice felt her heart almost
turn over with pride and gratitude and love, and even Kate
Vandevoort's eyes swam in tears of sympathy as she squeezed the hand
Alice impetuously had thrust into hers.Ah, it was a brave sight, and all too soon over. It was beautiful
to see how carelessly the cadet officers strolled up afterwards to
mingle with the visitors and to parry the enthusiasm of fond mothers
and lively girls, with a fine disregard of their eager compliments,
but an ear greedy for more of the same thing.George Copeland began to open his eyes when he saw what a centre of
attraction his sister had become. He was bored to death by cadets
begging to be introduced, and to his disgust he found that whenever he
wanted Counselman, it would be better and simpler just to look for
Alice. He never had thought her
pretty in Stockbridge. In fact, he never had thought of her at all,
except when he wanted her to wait on him, for her willing feet flew on
his errands as ungrudgingly as on her mother's. But here she was so
pretty that he was surprised.He went up to his father and handed him a letter."Here is a letter for sister, sir, which came in one of mine," he
said."From whom, son?""From mother," he answered, his face darkening involuntarily."What did she have to say? How is she?""Here it is. I haven't read it, sir. I--I haven't had time," he
stammered, in answer to his father's quick glance."Thank you, son," said Judge Copeland, putting the letter in his
pocket. He fingered the one addressed to Alice uncertainly, and looked
affectionately at her bright face, where the color was fluttering as
he never had seen it before. He looked down at the letter again, then
sighed and put it with the other. He did not realize that George was
watching him."That's right," muttered George, turning away. "No use in spoiling
the child's pleasure now. I'll bet the governor doesn't read mine in a
hurry for all he's so polite about it." He scowled as he thought of the pile in his quarters, unopened
and unanswered, into which his mother had poured a great deal of
mother love in spite of being so mixed up with the bulletins of the
sick in Stockbridge, and advice about his own health, that no one but
Job--or a woman could have stood it to read them.Gordon was one of the managers of the hop, and had to tear himself
away early, leaving Alice an opportunity to be very quiet as she
walked back to the hotel with Miss Vandevoort and Senator Cobb.The only thing she remembered about dinner was being very much
amused at an enormous bouquet of yellow roses that Senator Cobb had
caused to be sent to Miss Vandevoort, as a result of that charming
young lady's coquetry of the morning.  Then there was a breathless
hour in which she dressed herself for the hop--eager, nay, anxious
almost to the verge of tears, to be lovely just that one night for
Gordon Counselman's sake. No need for Kate Vandevoort to advise her
to wear her very prettiest frock or to look more animated, Her
nervousness flushed her cheeks and made her great eyes black, so that
when Miss Vandevoort rapped smartly on Alice's door and came in to
inspect her costume and to urge her to take herself well in hand,
instead of the shy, timid little maid from Stockbridge she had
expected to see, she was confronted by a radiant creature with eyes
like stars, who held her head
high and challenged your best admiration on the spot."Mon Dieu!" cried Miss Vandevoort. "Where is
the little Alice Copeland I came to see? I am looking for a little
mouse of a girl, whose hair I was to tidy and whose tucker I was to
smooth, and who was going to creep into my pocket and only poke her
head out for George to dance with twice and for her father to take
into supper. Where is she?""Oh," laughed Alice, clasping her hands together in delight, "am I
so different? I feel different, Miss Vandevoort. I never felt this way
before. I have always hated to dance, but to-night I hope that I shall
be asked often. I can hardly wait to begin."Miss Vandevoort reached out for support in a surprise which was not
feigned."Alice," she said, weakly, "you'll be the death of me. Your Quaker
attitude of yesterday contrasted with your fin de
siècle attitude of to-day is too much for my feeble brain
to grasp. I never realized the magic of old Flirtation before.""It wasn't that--" began Alice, hastily. But Kate held up her
hand."Don't add the sin of falsehood to your other crimes, Alice," she
said, solemnly."What other crimes?" asked Alice."The crime of deceiving me. I thought you were a little brown wren. I find you a
bird-of-paradise. Come on! I hear the band. We mustn't miss a moment
to-night! As a rule I make a triumphant entry late, looking cool and
fresh when the other girls are warm and a trifle dishevelled from a
waltz; but to-night I want to be early and sit in the bald-headed row
and see the curtain go up. Here is your fan. Tuck your handkerchief in
there. Where are your hair-pins? I want just one to fasten this
curl. Now, I think you are perfect. Who sent these flowers--Senator
Cobb?""No. Mr.--Mr. C--Counselman sent them," stammered Alice with
flaming checks.Miss Vandevoort turned her head away and bit her lips. Not for
worlds would she have had Alice see her smile."They are very handsome," she said. "That looks like a bouquet that
Gordon Counselman would send. Pink roses and lilies-of-the-valley. I
really think that is the most beautiful and appropriate bouquet I ever
saw.""Do you, really?" cried Alice. "I thought so, but I didn't expect
everybody to agree with me.""I do, at any rate, and I am a judge. You can tell quite a good
deal about a man by the kind of flowers he sends you.""Then Senator Cobb must be very artistic," said Alice,
laughing."Senator Cobb has an artistic florist. He never designates what
kind of flowers shall be sent. Gordon does. Now hold your dress up on
both sides--a little more on the left--and come with me."Judge Copeland, Senator Cobb, and George Copeland were waiting for
them, and as soon as they appeared at the door of the hop-room, Gordon
Counselman was with them instantly, looking past all the other
girls--past even lovely Kate Vandevoort herself--to Alice, who never
looked so pretty nor so sweet as when she laid her hand shyly on
Gordon's arm and paused to look at the decorations, all of which,
though he would not say so, were his taste.No one could deny that the room was beautiful, for the military
lends itself readily to decorations. From crossed sabres and stacked
arms up to small cannon, everywhere were the signs of the peaceful
side of war; and over and under and above, in all kinds of soft
draperies and flowing festoons, the flag--the dear, dear flag--that
flag which taste and love and patriotism all combine to make us think
the most beautiful in the world; the flag which pulls at your
heartstrings like a human thing when you see it floating anywhere;
which makes you want to put your hand on it and love it if you see
pictures of it with hosts of others; which, when you accidentally run
across it in Europe, makes you want to kiss and hug and cry over it,
if you are a woman, and stand
up and take your hat off to it, if you are a man.Gordon watched Alice as her eyes fell upon these flags. She looked
up at him without speaking, and he pressed the hand which lay on his
arm against his tight gray coat, and, perhaps, she closed her fingers
a little more closely on his sleeve; but of that no one can be
sure. At any rate, they understood each other without words, as we are
told lovers have a little way of doing, so that when Gordon said "I
love it," Alice said "So do I," and each knew that the other meant the
flag.Who shall describe a girl's first ball, with plenty of partners and
her dress satisfactory and the floor good and the band military, and
the man of her heart the superb dancer that Gordon Counselman was?Gordon danced with just the same generous enthusiasm and
out-of-door swing that he put into his riding and his swimming. It was
whole-hearted and athletic and elastic, and people always watched him
and felt the younger for it, and asked who he was.George came up after Alice's card was filled and asked to see
it. He hated to dance, but it was something to step into a ring of
"the other fellows" crowding around a girl, and to call her by her
Christian mane, and to pat her hand with an air of pro-prietorship which made "the other fellows"
green with envy."Why, your card is all filled," he said, in a tone of
disappointment. Alice was so surprised that he really showed some
feeling, and so grateful and so touched, that she almost stammered in
her eagerness to explain."No, George, I saved one for you. This one with the cross over
it. That is for you. I saved it. I thought perhaps you would be late
asking me."There was no reproach in her honest little soft voice, and it was
sisterly affection and gratitude for his notice which flushed her
cheeks in such a bewitching manner that Gordon Counselman was obliged
to turn away for fear "the other fellows" would see how he felt about
her. "The other fellows" are both the Mrs. Grundy and the Sir Hubert
of West Point.Alice Copeland's evening, if one might judge by her radiant face,
possessed no drawbacks, even in spite of Gordon's undoubted popularity
with buds, young ladies, and even old ladies, who would stop him, to
pat his arm and ask how he was enjoying himself, when he was dashing
from one partner to another.Perhaps his unfortunate experience of the morning had taught him a
lesson in the despatch necessary to exercise with a popular girl, for
in that walk down old
Flirtation, he had mapped out the dances he wanted with Alice, and she
had given them to him with such shy, happy eyes that the impetuous
young cadet wanted to tell her right then and there that he loved her
with all his boyish heart and soul, and perhaps Alice wouldn't have
been so very angry if he had.Miss Vandevoort stopped in at Alice's room, after it was over, to
talk about it."Did you have a good time, dearie?""Oh, so good!" cried Alice, clasping her hands. "I do believe I am
the happiest girl in the world. Everything is so beautiful, isn't
it?""Yes, everything. And I have the most beautiful news of all to tell
you now.""Oh, what is it? How could anything be lovelier than to-night has
been?""Well, your brother has invited Gordon Counselman to spend part of
his leave at your house, and perhaps Mollie Overshine will ask me down
to Stockbridge for the same time."" Oh, dear Miss Vandevoort!"Alice could say no more. She wanted to say so much, but something
came up in her throat and choked her. Perhaps it was her own great
happiness. Perhaps it was a something in Kate Vandevoort's wistful,
smiling eyes. But whatever it was, when Kate made a little impetuous
movement of her arms as if to
open them, Alice sprang forward and flung herself into them, hiding
her face in the laces on Kate's breast, and clinging to her dumbly as
if knowing that she understood because she was a woman. And while they
stood thus, a voice from below, which they both recognized as Gordon
Counselman's, began to sing the first verse of that dear old song,
"Benny Havens, O," and instantly voice after voice caught it up, until
the cadets were serenading the girls at the hotel with, save and
excepting "Fair Harvard," the most musical, the most pathetic, the
most haunting college melody ever sung by human throats:"Fill up your glasses, fellows,And stand up in a row,To sentimental drinking weAre going for to go.In the army of sobriety,Promotion's rather slow,We'll sigh o'er reminiscencesOf Benny Havens, O!"As these words rang clearly out upon the quiet night, Alice felt
the sudden clutch of Kate's arms around her, and Kate bent her tall
head and laid her cheek on Alice's soft hair a moment, and a sob rose
in her throat that Alice could not help but hear--oh, the memories of
old songs!--then she put the girl gently away from her and went
out, still without
speaking. Perhaps she could not bear to have Alice see her face.When she had gone, Alice went and knelt down by the open window and
listened to the fresh young voices which floated the music up to her
as if on wings, and it all seemed so beautiful and so sad, and she was
young and so much in love that she began to cry very softly, as if
she, too, had memories which the dear song waked to life--only she
hadn't. But it never does women any harm to weep and sob and cry their
hearts out over tender, old-fashioned music. And if they were not just
that gentle and sentimental and soft-hearted, the men would never love
them as they do.VIIICOUNTER-IRRITANTSMRS. COPELAND so seldom indorsed anybody whom the family liked that
it was quite a pleasant surprise to them when she metaphorically took
Kate Vandevoort to her bosom and made it evident by her thawed manner
that the Vandevoorts' ancestry equalled the Copelands'. Furthermore,
and in addition to this fundamental fact, Kate was a stupendous social
success, the belle of three cities. This, too, had its weight.An idol of the people is on so insecure a footing that it behooves
one who aspires to that slippery elevation to look well to what sort
of a cushion is beneath him, unless he likewise aspires to broken
bones and bruised feelings, for, by a single "Thumbs down," he is apt
to find himself shaken up, out of breath and dizzy from his fall.A social idol, a belle, is perhaps in the most precarious situation
of all, and this made the triumphal march of Miss Vandevoort all the
more surpris-ing, inasmuch as
she conquered everything and everybody, wherever she chose, and did it
apparently without effort. It was not that she was so beautiful--hosts
of buds came on the scene of action whose features were more regular
than hers. It was not because she had family and great wealth at her
back; many girls have failed to become belles who have had both. Nor
could it be laid entirely to her personal magnetism, although it could
not fail of being a somewhat potent factor when it was sufficient to
win over and hold some who openly avowed enmity before coming in range
of her electricity. Perhaps more than all, but in conjunction with
these necessary attractions, it was her absolutely sincere interest in
the lives of other people, which never fails to fascinate, and her
sense of humor, that gift of the gods, who show how little they value
women by their niggardliness towards them with this celestial gift. We
women have a right to question the wisdom of Olympus, when we, who
must of necessity cope with the petty, narrow, hateful woman-worries
of life, are only given the shield of Patience and are denied the
buckler of Humor, when we might just as well have had both and been
invulnerable, all but the heel.Tito Melema maintained his popularity by pretending to give the
honor to another, always another, and apparently keeping himself in
the back-ground, which cunning
policy served to keep him the idol of the people until they discovered
that they were being tricked.Although Miss Vandevoort was just the one to appreciate the
cleverness of Tito, she was far too impatient of the restrictions
which any set policy imposed to bind herself to anything which
threatened to fetter her freedom to be individual and natural. The
whimsical theories which she expounded to Alice Copeland she lived up
to truly, yet only because her nature, in spite of her free speech,
was of the kindliest, and because it was natural to her to wish to
please.Thus, when she turned her amused eyes on one who mentioned her
popularity in her presence, he at once felt that she, too, was but an
interested spectator at the show, and that she held it at its proper
value, even scorning what might so easily be lost. She mocked and
laughed at the idea that people seriously discussed the fact that she
was a belle, and held them and herself and all such up to such sincere
ridicule that they were compelled, much against their will, halfway to
believe her. In consequence they, too, turned around and gave her the
homage which she seemed to value so lightly, and which, with the true
amiability of human nature, they so gladly would have withheld had
they felt that she depended upon it.Mrs. Copeland reverenced Power; perhaps because circumstances,
Fate, Destiny, what you will, had denied her the exercise of it, save
in a small way, she reverenced Social Power more than all.Not through the Overshines alone, but in countless ways--through
travellers who had met her abroad, through the vulgar channels of the
daily newspapers, which Mrs. Copeland openly denounced, and read in
private, and through her hosts of friends in Philadelphia and New York
who knew Kate--did Mrs. Copeland become conversant with her social
successes. So when this young goddess signified her willingness not
only to pay her cousin Mollie Overshine a visit, but to meet and
mingle with Stockbridge society, a thing which she never had done
before, the secret delight of several first families almost burst
their good Quaker bounds. However much the people living there might
discuss their chronic ill-health and deprecate the unbroken quiet of
Stockbridge, they sincerely objected to having a New York belle
frankly declare that hitherto she had used their town simply as a
sanitarium.When she arrived, Mrs. Copeland at once called upon her, and
invited the Overshines and Miss Vandevoort to dine, changing her
dinner-hour, as she did upon state occasions, from noon to seven
o'clock, for the accommodation of their honored guest.Kate arrayed herself with unusual care for that dinner at the
Copelands, and she was quite thoughtful for several hours
beforehand. Her casual acquaintance with Mrs. Copeland, supplemented
by Mollie Overshine's shrewd anecdotes, had taught her that here was a
foeman worthy of her steel--a woman who would unflinchingly sacrifice
her daughter's happiness to her own ambition. In meeting her again,
she felt that peculiar antagonized feeling to which impressionable
natures are so sensitive. You can explain this only to one who is in
the habit of experiencing it. Mrs. Copeland never would have
understood it. She had no intuitions, and she often thanked Heaven
that she was not sensitive.As Kate swept into the Copeland drawing-room in an evening dress so
extreme that it looked as if it were slipping from her polished
shoulders, Mrs. Copeland simply closed her eyes. But she opened them
again when she remembered that it was Miss Vandevoort who wore it.Kate possessed an electrical nature which groped after hidden
elements of discomfort and pleasure, and repelled the foreign or
appropriated her own whenever she found either. She could enter a room
full of strangers and select those whom she would like, and who would
like her, before speaking to any of them.In this instance she knew that there was a disturbing element
present. She wondered what it was. She set herself quietly to observe
and to wrest the true cause from some one unaware.Alice was quiet and subdued--no longer the Alice of West Point. The
judge, too, had lost some of the assured charm of manner which comes
from a sensitive nature feeling itself constantly approved of. Kate
smiled to realize that even she felt in a measure quieted, for
Mrs. Copeland had a dignified way of making her guests feel the honor
of being beneath her distinguished roof.Miss Vandevoort, who loved children, suddenly spied Elsie, lean,
sallow, and unlovely, and moved by pity for so forlorn a specimen of
petted childhood, turned and greeted her kindly. But to her
unspeakable dismay Elsie immediately burst into tears and thrust
herself behind her mother."Oh, Miss Vandevoort, I neglected to tell you," said Mrs. Copeland,
"that we never speak suddenly to Elsie like that. My child is very
timid, and I have been three days in persuading her to come into the
drawing-room at all to-night. She suffers so from hysteria. We
approach her very cautiously."The corners of Kate's mouth twitched. When she found it was
hysteria, and not that the child had cut her hand off or burst a
blood-vessel, it was with
difficulty that Kate kept herself from jumping at Elsie and giving her
something to cry for."How sadly the child is afflicted," sighed Mrs. Overshine.Kate suddenly remembered that everybody in Stockbridge had a
chronic ailment, and this incident revealed in a flash how they were
acquired. Realizing a neglected duty, she said, with well simulated
sympathy, "Do tell me, dear Mrs. Copeland, how is your poor head?""It is very bad, thank you, Miss Vandevoort. Some days I am truly
wretched with it. Oh, no one knows my sufferings.""What a pity! And you look so well, too. No one would believe you
were such a martyr if he did not hear the statement from your own
lips. And the judge, is his--his dyspepsia better?""Well, not very much. He spent a sleepless night, and, as you see,
looks pale this evening.""And Gifford, is he quite well?""No, Gifford cut his wrist with a penknife yesterday, and I
persuaded him to have the doctor see it. He said if it had been two
inches higher it might have been serious.""How fortunate those two inches are! And George, has he
arrived?""No, he is still in New York, and I am afraid he is ill. I wrote him a ten-page letter,
filled with advice about his health, and telling him all the primary
symptoms of several diseases that I hear are prevailing there, and
pleading with him as only a mother can, to sit down and think if he
felt any of them, and if so, to telegraph which and to see a doctor at
once. But I have had no reply.""How anxious you must be," said Kate, earnestly. "And Alice, here;
it seems to me that she looks too quiet and sad to be quite well.""Yes, Alice practises too much. She has a weak back, I think.""Mamma, I am perfectly well," said Alice."I know you think so, dear, but your eyes look heavy. Oh, Alice is
far from well. We are none of us strong.""Indeed, Mrs. Copeland, I can see that you are not. If asked my
opinion, I should be obliged to admit that you enjoyed poor
health."Alice regarded Kate gravely. She never countenanced a word either
in fun or in earnest which held her mother up to ridicule. But Miss
Vandevoort apparently saw nothing amusing in what she had said, and
Mrs. Copeland was Scotch.Kate immediately repented her impertinent little speech, which
nobody except Colonel Overshine had recognized. She turned away from
the spectacle of his red face, and said to the judge:"It was beautiful of you, Judge Copeland, to make such a noble gift
to Stockbridge as that fine Public Library. Mollie and I have been all
over it to-day, and although I tried with all the ingenuity at my
command, I could find not the slightest flaw in it.""And would you have been so happy to find it imperfect, Miss
Vandevoort?" said Mrs. Copeland, in a colorless voice, which sent
little shivers of aversion shuddering all the way to Kate's
fingertips.Judge Copeland smiled at her benignantly, and Mrs. Overshine
hastened to say:"Kate was so enthusiastic over it that I could hardly drag her
away. She always acts as if books were human and understood her when
she tells each one why she loves it. We had the children with us, and
that very thing showed the difference between them. Frances clung to
Kate's hand, shrieking in delight at Kate's fantastic speeches to her
pet books, speeches which Frances did not entirely comprehend, but she
caught at the meaning sufficiently to grasp the fun of the
situation. But Peggy, together with two or three old ladies standing
near--Mrs. Troutman and Mrs. Frazer, Chris--looked at her as if they
thought her simply a harmless lunatic.""Oh, is Mrs. Frazer well enough to be out?" said Mrs. Copeland. "I
heard that this new treat-ment was helping her. She has had nervous prostration for
fourteen years, and her mother died of heart disease. There is
consumption in the family, too. It is a marvel to me that she is alive
to-day. I think she shows a wonderful vitality.""Yes, she was out to-day, and looking quite well for her," answered
Mrs. Overshine."I notice that she always gets well enough to be out when there is
anything going on," observed Colonel Overshine, with a twinkle in his
eye. "She hadn't seen the new Library, so she partially recovered
again."Mrs. Overshine cleared her throat at him as a warning."Her wonderful vitality evidences itself in quite marvellous
partial recoveries, Kate," he continued, disregarding his wife's
signals of distress, which nevertheless he saw perfectly.Kate raised her lace handkerchief to her lips, and felt, rather
than saw, the sudden stiffening of the backbone of her hostess.Mrs. Overshine shook her head imploringly at her husband."She will go to bed again to-morrow," pursued Colonel Overshine,
ruthlessly, "until another small excitement occurs. Then she will be
'able to be out' once more.""She is perfectly honest in her illness, Colonel Overshine," said Mrs. Copeland, coldly. "There is
a great deal of suffering in Stockbridge. I wanted the judge to build
a hospital instead of a library, but he had his own way about it, as
usual.""Oh, my dear wife, there was no controversy about it. Pray assure
our friends of that.""No, because I gave up my way at once. I always do.""Why, I thought you were quite pleased with the idea of the
library," said the judge, with a note of anxiety in his voice.It seems as if some men never would see the
justice of the way a woman who has been affronted by somebody else
takes it out on her husband, or whoever happens to be handy."You know perfectly well that I should have preferred a
hospital.""I suppose, dear Mrs. Copeland," put in Colonel Overshine,
repenting too late for the turn he had given the conversation, "that
the judge thought Stockbridge was more in need of encouragement along
the line of the library. In this town sickness reaches perfection
through its own impetus."Mrs. Copeland drew back her chin in silent
displeasure. Mrs. Overshine mentally washed her hands of her husband,
who then looked at his ally, Kate, for the approval which the honest
gentleman really expected to follow this well-meant jocularity. But Kate, in response to a
telegram from Mollie, had turned her back on him. They meant to make
him feel his disgrace.When dinner was announced, Elsie refused to move, so after politely
hanging back and wondering what was going to happen next, all except
Mrs. Copeland proceeded to the dining-room, where presently
Mrs. Copeland appeared, with Elsie hiding her face in her mother's
skirts and half walking on her train."If you don't look at her or notice her," whispered Mrs. Copeland,
"perhaps she will be all right."Accordingly they began an animated discussion about nothing at all,
while Mrs. Copeland coaxed Elsie, who still hid her face and
occasionally wept. Judge Copeland watched the contest thoughtfully,
but said nothing. Alice's face flushed uncomfortably, but she never
thought of interfering. Colonel and Mrs. Overshine were used to it,
but Kate's fingers fairly twitched to jerk Elsie into her chair in
short order, and have done with such nonsense. How civilization steps
in in such a crisis! Kate merely sighed, and murmured, "Poor child!"Before the soup was removed, however, Elsie consented to get into
her chair, provided it were changed from her mother's left to her
right. Colonel Overshine accordingly offered to move, and Elsie sat in the vacated chair with her hair
pulled over her eyes.Frank Overshine, with his kind, wide smile and genuine simplicity,
was told off to Alice, who made spasmodic efforts to entertain him
while she tried to listen to every word that Kate uttered.The dinner was exquisitely appointed and served, but Elsie cried
twice, and finally Mrs. Copeland took her from the table."The clear child," she murmured, as she returned.Everybody gurgled something in reply, and then Mrs. Overshine
said,"I hear that George and his friend, Mr. Counselman, will soon be
here.""George will come next week, but as we expect another guest,
Mr. Counselman is not coming.""Ah, ha," thought Miss Vandevoort. "The other guest means, I
think, my friend Senator Cobb. Poor Alice. How can they? How can
they?""Oh, I am so sorry Gordon Counselman isn't coming," she said. "He
is such a lovely fellow, and so clever. Colonel Sheldon told me that
he had clone more towards the suppression of hazing at West Point than
any other cadet who ever entered there. He is such a strong character
that he could not fail of influencing any one with whom he came in
contact. He is a great friend of George's, Mrs. Copeland. I am glad your son had the good
taste to like him.""Kate, was he the one I overheard you telling Mollie about--the one
who was in the toils of poor Jim Verry's gay widow?" asked
Col. Overshine."Oh, no indeed. That was Mr. Pratt. Mrs. Verry paid attention to
Gordon last year--she is the boldest thing--but Gordon confided to me,
in his frank, boyish way, which gets such a hold on my heartstrings,
that he really thought Mrs. Verry was hardly as modest and ladylike as
he liked to see women. I could scarcely keep my face straight, for she
had toned herself down many shades in order to captivate Gordon's
well-known taste. I wonder what the boy would have said of her if he
could see her with her usual racing colors on.""By Jove, I'd like to have been at West Point with you, Kate. You
see so much.""Well, I don't go to sleep, Chris, if you mean that. I keep my eyes
open. But, dear me, there is so much to see.""What is Mrs. Verry doing now?" asked Colonel Overshine."Why, she spends most of her time hating me, because, for some
unaccountable reason, she thinks I interfere with her Senator Cobb.""Her Senator Cobb!" repeated Mrs. Copeland,
regarding Kate gravely, then looking pointedly at the judge and then at Alice, as if to say "How do
you explain that?""Yes, indeed," answered Kate, with what Alice recognized as her
innocent look. "Hers, dear Mrs. Copeland. Not mine, nor yours, nor
anybody's except Mrs. Verry's--so she thinks. I don't know why she
should be jealous of me. To be sure, he sent me
flowers once--Alice, you remember--but, if she only knew it, she need
not dread me.""Why, what's the matter with him? He must be queer if you won't
have anything to do with him.""Now, Cousin Mollie, isn't he unkind to me? Why, Chris, all that's
the matter with him only adds to his dignity. It is his age. Senator
Cobb is mediæval, and I don't go in for the antique.""Gray hairs are honorable, Miss Vandevoort," said Mrs. Copeland,
who labored under the delusion that it was proper to reprove a guest
under her roof for anything she saw amiss in her.Like many other good women, with excellent Stockbridge intentions
and high ideals in tatting, Mrs. Copeland was her brother's keeper to
such a rigorous extent that her spiritual brother often longed to go
from her presence straight to the broad way which leadeth to
destruction, just for a relish. Not only did she look after her son
and her daughter and her man servant and her maid servant and her ox
and her ass, but she also found time to attend to the moral well-being of every other ox and
ass in all Stockbridge."Yes, but, clear Mrs. Copeland," said Kate, sweetly, "his are not
gray. If they were, and there were more of them, they might inspire
your respect. But his hair is so thin, and he wears it long, so that a
strong draught lifts it now and then and exhibits its thinness
cruelly. He is lean, too, and he wears side-whiskers (I might forgive
the first, but not the second), and they are not all the same length
or the same color, so that he reminds you of a piece of moth-eaten
fur. He is a pale, straw-colored man all through. If he were a horse,
you would call him a clay-bank."And furthermore, dear Mrs. Copeland, if you ever happen to meet
him, for my sake, notice his peculiar smile; and I know why it is
so. He has the expansive smile of a man when he first wears false
teeth after having had much trouble with his old ones. He used to have
to hold his upper lip down when he laughed, but it is such a relief to
him to feel now that he can smile, grin, even roar, if he chooses,
that in an excess of ease and relief he relaxes his vigilance to the
extent of showing where his teeth join, and sometimes, if the jest is
an excellent one, even giving a good idea of the plate itself. Of
course there is no harm in this," added Miss Vandevoort, genially,
looking around to include
everybody, "only it is a little trying on the person opposite. If he
were wretchedly poor, he would be a pathetic figure, and you would
want to send him a red flannel nightcap for his poor old head, and a
warm wadded dressing-gown for his poor thin legs. As a grandfather in
a chimney-corner he would be a great success. But as it is, he is so
rich that he is simply nauseating, and so abundantly satisfied with
himself and so complacent that his smiles are an irritation and his
whiskers an insult."Alice's radiant face was a reward which even the grim expression on
Mrs. Copeland's failed to spoil. Kate was sure, from the uneasy manner
in which the judge watched his wife and Alice, during her wicked
speech, that affairs had come to a crisis with Senator Cobb, and that
poor Gordon's chances looked dubious indeed.When she got home that night she shook her fist at herself in the
glass."I hate you, Kate Vandevoort, when you ridicule a man's physical
imperfections. You think yourself so clever. Why couldn't you have
thought up a better way to help that poor girl than so to degrade
yourself in your own sight. Oh, poor Kate! You do try so hard to be
good, but it is such desperately weary work, and there is nothing,
absolutely nothing, in all this beautiful world for you to look
forward to, except to be of use to those who are weaker than you. No love, no home, no fireside of
your own. Just always to be an on-looker at the feast of others; to
feel the warmth of others' fires and to go shivering yourself. Oh, the
pity of it! The horrible pity of life! Can I see Alice wreck hers as
mine has been wrecked? See her eat her heart out in the utter
hopelessness of her just meed of joy? No, no"--her voice sank to a
whisper--"no matter how hard it is, I must go on with it--as he would
have had me."IXTHE CHILD PROBLEMDULL people, or those who have only stupid children, may well be
excused for declaring that the bewildering precocity of the John
Vandevoort children was unnatural and wellnigh impossible. Kate
herself, although an eye and ear witness of it, often went away from
them with an uncanny sense of the supernatural. Their sense of humor
was so adult, their cynicism so unsteadying. It can only be accounted
for in the facts that they had been parties from their babyhood to
the marital unhappiness of their father and mother, and the constant
companions of clever but unwise grown people, who openly discussed
social problems before them in a manner which could not fail of
impressing the dullest intellects. Falling as it did upon snapping
little brains, alert to hear and learn, it turned the Vandevoort
children into amateur philosophers, whose saying were a real terror
to those who held their precious little souls dear.That they adored their aunt Kate it is needless to say. She was
just picturesque enough to appeal to their quick imaginations, and in
return she made wild efforts to understand them. She succeeded to the
extent that they confided in her in preference to their mother, and
often said if Aunt Kate only could have been their mother, their
parents would have been perfect.The unhappy example of the supreme selfishness of their mother,
whose beauty they admired, but for whom they had very little
affection, drove Kate to seek out every possible opportunity to let
them, in the same manner, share the lovelier traits of
humanity. Otherwise she dared not face their future. The poor little
things, with all that culture and wealth and travel could give, had
been given no chance to learn the weightier matters of the law,
justice, mercy, and truth.Colonel Overshine was their obedient slave from the moment they
entered his house. He vowed that Frances was more entertaining than
all the grown-up people in Stockbridge put together, and that
round-eyed Peggy could wheedle the nose off his face, if she set her
mind to do it. Kate arranged their studies for them. They already
chattered in French and German as fluently as she herself, so she gave
them drawing and music, on condition that they should learn spelling
and arithmetic. Their manners in
public would have put Beau Brummell to the blush, but in private
Frances was a little demon, and Peggy would fight as quietly but as
long as a bull-dog. Frances flew into a passion a dozen times a day,
but was ready to kiss and apologize in two minutes. Peggy would stand
almost anything, but when once her anger against her sister began to
burn with a slow white heat, she had to be peeled off of Frances like
a plaster. She stuck to her in absolute silence, no matter what her
own injuries, with never a sound except Frances's yells and
screams. Only Kate could silence them. They obeyed her because they
adored yet feared her. They walked over their father's authority
because they knew that they could.They had been in Stockbridge about two months when Miss Vandevoort
came down from New York to pay this promised visit to Cousin Mollie
Overshine. She had been down several times during July, stopping over
for a day in flitting from mountains to sea-shore; but this time her
stay was to be longer, and the children cast themselves upon her in
rapturous delight.Kate sympathized with Frances the most, because everybody preferred
stupid little Peggy's sweetness to her older sister's too clever
intelligence.Nobody could take any comfort with as sharp a child as Frances, and
people made no secret of
their preference for the soothing companionship of her fat little
sister. Most people prefer a pin-cushion to an emery--for daily
use.One morning as Kate came out of the house with a telegram in her
hand, she found Frances on the veranda with her spelling-book."What are you doing, lamb?""Learning to spell, Aunt Kate, so that I can write letters to you
that you won't be ashamed of.""How nice that will be, and how proud I shall be of them. But do
you want to stop now and give a great deal of pleasure to
somebody?""Oh, I should like to well enough, if I were not doing something
more important.""Is there anything more important than deliberately to put a
pleasure into somebody's life?""Oh, I think so. It is more important to speak French. It is more
important to play on the piano. It is more important to sing well, so
that when I enter society I can be as much admired and have as many
lovers as you have.""Who told you anything about my lovers?" asked Kate, sternly."Mamma. She often talked to us about them. She said you were an
awful fool not to marry Sir James Whitehall. She said she thought your
success had turned your head, because you kept refusing such fine
offers, and that you would pick up
a crooked stick after all. I asked her what a crooked stick meant,
and she said papa was one. I told her I hoped you would marry a
crooked stick then, and she slapped me.""Good heavens!" said Kate, sitting down in a big wicker
rocking-chair and drawing Frances into her lap, regardless of her
fresh muslin dress that the child crushed."I am afraid I'll spoil your dress if I lean my head against your
shoulder," said Frances."Never mind if you do. I like the feel of your little head, just
to make sure that you are a little child, and
not a misshapen, grown-up, warped little soul with a dwarf's
body. Poor little dear! You've never had half a chance. I ought not
to be angry with you, my lamb; but it nearly kills me to hear you
talk in that manner.""Oh, Auntie Kate, don't look that way! I won't speak all day. I'll
do anything for you, if you will just tell me. I didn't know I was saying anything to make you
sorry. Perhaps you are sorry because Mamma slapped me? Pooh! that
wasn't anything. She slapped us whenever anything went wrong, whether
we did it or not. But the time she slapped and shook us till our
heads most fell off--she's awful strong--was when she used to get
hysterics and scream, and Peggy and I would screech and yell just
like her, to see who could yell the loudest. My, but she gave it to us then! Hortense pretended
to help her, but she got us away from her and locked us in the nursery
till Mamma cooled down. Then she let us out, and we went to drive in
the victoria, and lots of people looked at us and said, 'What lovely
children!' just as if they wished theirs were like us. I felt like
saying, 'Well, you wouldn't, if you knew the inside of us.'"Kate only went on rocking her in silence. For once she had nothing
to say."I wish you were my mother," said Frances, suddenly. "Liebes
Kaetchen! You would make an awfully nice mother. You know how to treat
children. Mamma doesn't. Mamma ought to have stayed a bachelor. What
are you laughing at? Isn't that the right word? I told that to Cousin
Chris, and he laughed so, he most shook me off his lap. Cousin Mollie
said I meant 'spinster,' but Cousin Chris said, 'No, leave it
bachelor. That word describes Emily Vandevoort to a T.' Mamma does not
approve of marriage for anybody. When she meets a young lady in
society, she takes her hand, like this, and she says, 'Miss Gilbert, allow me to congratulate you that it
is not as Mrs. Somebody that I must address
you.'""Good heavens!" cried Kate, setting Frances up in her lap and
holding her two arms down tightly, "what an awful thing to hear the
cynicism of the world brought home
by such baby lips as yours! Stop thinking about such things. Come,
don't you want to go with me to see Miss Alice Copeland? I have a
telegram in my hand which will make her eyes shine so that you could
see them in the dark.""Like a cat under the bed," said Frances, who was nothing if not a
believer in applied science."Well, that is hardly as poetical as to liken them to stars in
heaven, but it does very well, and certainly no one could
misunderstand you."Frances laughed shrilly."You are making fun," she declared. "I love to hear people make
fun. Nobody ever does it at our house any more. But whenever I go out,
I always laugh every chance I get."She darted away to get ready, and came back swinging her hat by one
of the ribbons."Don't make me put it on," she begged as they started. "I always
have to be so prim when I walk in New York with Hortense, with her
eternal 'Prenez-garde, ma chère,' and her always clawing our
skirts down and our hair back. That's why I just love Stockbridge. It is so still, and the trees
rustle so, and the grass is so soft and green, and I haven't seen a
single sign 'Keep off the grass' since we have been here. In India
once a man asked Papa what our national motto was, and he said the only national motto
that we enforced was 'Keep off the grass,' and everybody laughed
except the Englishman who asked him. He believed it, Papa said.""Your father also told a man in London that our national dish was
pie.""Pie? And he believed it, didn't he? That's what Papa said is the
funny part.""Yes, he believed it.""What makes people fool Englishmen so?""Oh, because they never know anything about America. It's so lovely
to see what impossible statements they will believe.""Why don't they know about America?""Because they don't want to. I suppose they like to be
provincial.""Provincial? What's provincial?""Let me see. Why, provincial means liking your own little hole in
the world so much that you never stick your head outside of it to see
if there is anything else.""Don't English people know about anything but England?""Two or three of them do.""Well, we know about them.""Oh yes; that's fashionable.""But isn't it fashionable for them to know about us?""No, it is fashionable for them not to know about us.""Is that what makes Englishmen so funny?""Yes," said Kate, laughing. "That is exactly what makes Englishmen
so funny.""Just look at this lovely grass," sighed the child, running her
eyes hungrily over the meadows and lawns."If you love grass so much, you should see the prairies out West,"
said Kate."Out West?" repeated Frances. "I don't think I should care to go
out West. Mamma says that New York is all of America that I need to
see.""Take care, little Miss Provincial! Won't you stick your head out
of your little hole and take a look at the beautiful world beyond? Or
do you want to be as funny as an Englishman?""Can you be provincial in America?" asked Frances, opening her
eyes."Certainly. The worst kind of provincialism is the American,
because that is all put on, and the English is real. They were born
that way.""Oh, I hate anybody who 'puts on.'""Then don't turn up that nose of yours at America, because you
haven't seen any of it yet.""Stockbridge is nice," said Frances. "I like it because I can play
with the coachman's children. Mamma never lets me in New York. But I
don't see why. Sometimes I
want to play with them worse than anything else in the world. My
geography says that people don't all belong to the same race. The
Chinese are Mongolians, and we are Caucasians. Now, the coachman's
children belong to the barn race, and I belong to the house
race. That's all the difference. And sometimes I think the barn race
has the best time."Kate was immensely amused, and yet a little terrified. She found
herself telling the child things as she would to a grown person. It
was impossible not to respect such intelligence, no matter how
childish the body. But then Kate Vandevoort was so queer. She actually
respected childhood, and saw wonderful possibilities of individualism
in little souls which other people, older and wiser than she, were
sorting into batches and labelling alike. She wondered what kind of a
woman Frances would make. Either a very bad one or a very good one. By
her daily life she would either teach the way upward or set a fearful
example of what to avoid. But, at any rate, interesting--interesting!
And that is half the battle. Interesting to old and young, to high and
low alike. Even as a child, Kate felt that Frances had the gift of
feeling the heart of humanity."There is where Miss Copeland lives," said Kate."Is it? That great house on the terrace, with white pillars like
the Parthenon?"Kate looked down at her, seized with a physical weakness. She
doubted if she herself should have associated Corinthian columns with
anything more elevated than the White House."What do you remember about the Parthenon, you baby?""Why, didn't I ever tell you? Mamma and Papa had an awful quarrel
there. Papa wanted to go to see it again by moonlight, but she
wouldn't. She said once was enough, and she called him an awful fool
for wanting to go. So he came into our room with his lips set together
like this, and had Hortense take me up and dress me; and he carried me
there and told me to look at it and remember it. And I did. And it was
the most beautiful thing I ever saw in all my life, but so
lonesome. And he kissed me most a hundred times when I said so, and he
said I belonged to him. But he left a tear on my cheek, and it scared
me so I've never forgotten it."She paused at the gate."There are Peggy and Hortense!" she declared. "Don't call them
over. Leave them, and let's go in alone.""Come, come, none of that, Miss Piggy Selfishness. Suppose you go
home and leave me to go in
alone. Haven't we come to be generous with Miss Copeland about the
telegram?""Yes, but it's so much easier to be generous with other people than
with your sister.""Then all the more credit to you when you share with Peggy. It is
only people like you and me, who would much rather be bad, who deserve
any credit for being good.""You are good naturally, liebes Kaetchen.""Not a bit of it. There are times when I want to tear things wide
open, and scream, and break things, just the way you do.""But you never do it," said Frances, aghast
at the picture."Certainly not. I won't allow myself to. I always think how silly
it must look to good people who never lose their temper."Frances colored."And to the angels," she said, softly.Kate squeezed her hand with sudden feeling."Shall we be bad now, and not let Peggy come, or shall we be
good?""Will you do just as I say?" asked Frances, curiously."Yes; but remember, if you lead me into temptation, it will be a
double sin for you.""But if I say to send Peggy back home, will you do it, and take me
in alone?" she insisted."Yes.""Then call Peggy. Or, no, let me call her. Allons, Peggy! Hortense!
Venez ici. Venez avec nous. Nous allons faire une visite à
Mademoiselle Copeland. Voudriez-vous venir?""Oh, ja, ja!" cried Peggy, who was so Dutch, with her fat legs and
Gretchen braids, that she spoke her German from preference."Parlez francais, mademoiselle," said Hortense, angrily, with a
sharp pull at the child's hand."Hortense," said Miss Vandevoort, quietly."Je vous demande pardon, mademoiselle.""Parlez avec plus de douceur, je vous prie. Laissez les enfants
parler allemand quand ils veulent.""Je vous demande pardon, mademoiselle, mais je deteste
l'allemand.""Oui, je le sais, mais je le veux.""C'est assez, mademoiselle," said Hortense, with a smile.Servants always adored Kate, and Hortense had been such a faithful
creature and so discreet through all the family trouble that Kate was
particularly fond of her. Her chief fault was that she waged a
perpetual war with the German governess.When Frances was good, she was very, very good, and also, like the
little girl with the immortal curl in the middle of her immortal
forehead, "when she was bad,
she was horrid." However, it was almost worth a tantrum to put her
into the celestial state of mind which always followed an outburst,
and to which she now had attained through her forbearance towards
Peggy, whose fat legs were toiling up the steps of the terrace just
ahead of her. Peggy reached the top with scarlet cheeks and the breath
almost pumped from her short body. But the little, thin, nervous face
of Frances was ethereally beautiful. Her coal-black curls, loose
almost to straightness, hung around her pale cheeks like a frame, and
her great velvet eyes never left Kate's face, as she humbly clung to
her hand, like a tamed spirit of the air.Never was there anything prettier or more lady-like than the way in
which she greeted Mrs. Copeland, whom they found upon the terrace,
going up to her to be presented with the quiet self-possession of a
woman of the world. She looked with amazement upon Elsie, who refused
to look up or speak to Miss Vandevoort, and who, when she lifted her
head from her mother's lap, only stared at Peggy and Frances in shy,
stubborn silence.Frances instinctively held aloof from Mrs. Copeland, recognizing
the coldness in her face, although much more interested in her than
Elsie. But, as usual, Peggy, the little round diplomat, who would not
have given a crumb where Frances would have given her last crust or the whole loaf, engagingly climbed
upon Mrs. Copeland's black satin knee, and artfully coiled herself in
the iron receptacle which served that austere woman for a heart.Mrs. Copeland was graciously pleased to invite the children to
lunch with Elsie. Peggy accepted joyfully, scrambling down from
Mrs. Copeland's lap and trotting up to the house without a backward
glance. Frances, who much preferred the society of grown people, hung
back until Kate sent her after the rest.Kate afterwards remembered the beautiful expression of her face,
and she knew what a genius for irritation Mrs. Copeland must possess,
in order to stir up the storm in which that unhappy luncheon or dinner
ended.XON THE BOAT-HOUSE STEPSWHEN Mrs. Copeland drew from her pocket her fancy work, and settled
back in the rustic seat where they had found her, Alice, in obedience
to a gesture from Kate, proposed that they should go down to the
boat-house."What is the matter with you, Alice?" said Kate, when they were
alone."Oh, nothing. What makes you ask?""Oh, nothing."Kate laughed roguishly."Aren't you going to tell me?""There's nothing to tell.""When is Senator Cobb coming to propose to you?""How did you know he was going to?" asked Alice, startled."I didn't. I only wanted to know. Are you going to accept him?""I don't know. They--""You don't know! They--!" cried Kate, with a shake of Alice's
shoulder that made her bite her tongue. "How dare you hint at such a
thing? Do you mean to tell me that you love that awful old man?""No, no," cried Alice, covering her face with her hands."Then has that precious mother of yours urged you into it?""Urged? Urged? I never hear anything else. She is going to make me! I don't dare to refuse.""You little coward!""Yes, but you don't know my mother. You don't know her. You don't
know her."Alice evidently could not gain her own consent to say more."What does your father say?""He says for me to do as I will. He never even said that much
before when anything went against mother's wishes. He always wants me
to do as she says.""Wouldn't your father befriend you if you refused in this
case?""I don't know. He would stand between us, I think, if I could only
tell him.""Why don't you tell him?""Oh, I couldn't. It seems so--so indelicate.""Alice Copeland, I hope there is nobody else in the world exactly
like you.""Why, I think that is a sign of refinement," said Alice,
primly."I know you do, my dear. And if you don't beware, you will approve
of your own refinement to such an extent that you will turn out an
unconscionable little prig. You don't seem to mind dealing me a rap
into the bargain, but I do not care particularly, for it is only the
result of Stockbridge and Presbyterianism and the pharisaic atmosphere
you breathe. Your bad manners do not come from an unkind
heart. Consequently you only lack tact. But for the sake of your
friend myself, I pray Heaven you may acquire that soon.""I have hurt your feelings," said Alice, remorsefully."Yes, you have hurt my feelings, because I am only a publican and a
sinner, and because I live in a wicked city where publicans are liked
and approved of, and where we seldom get a rap over the nose such as
you just dealt to me.""Oh, I am so sorry.""I don't lay it up against you, because I hardly see how you could
be anything else with the exam--ahem!-- with such surroundings. Good
heavens, Alice! You ought to go around the world, and get a point of
view."Alice looked up, startled by Miss Vandevoort's vehemence. "A point
of view?" she repeated, doubtfully."Yes, yes; a point of view! Is anything more maddening than to go
ambling peacefully along in life, smiling at the world and harming
nobody, and suddenly to dash your head against the stone wall of
provincial virtue, and lie on your back for a while, seeing red and
green stars? I really think there is an element of viciousness in the
virtue of a small town which is worse than loose-slippered
liberality. I think narrowness, whenever and wherever you meet it, is
the most irritating of all the vices. Of course, I am a woman, and I
can only talk and rage about these things in a perfectly ladylike and
refined way; but they make me desperate.""Do I make you feel like that?" asked
Alice."Oh, no, not quite yet," said Miss Vandevoort, rumpling her hair
with whimsical fretfulness. "But I am afraid of what you are going to
be. You have set your feet on the slippery downward path of
Perfection, and I only wish you could see how stupidly conceited you
appear to a pagan outsider, because you believe so absolutely that you
are right and that I am wrong. Now I don't agree with you. I am wrong
enough, Heaven knows, only you are more wrong than I. It is but a
question of degree. You can't see it, and you are not believing me
right now, because you are
looking at me from the point of view of Stockbridge, Potts County,
Pennsylvania. You are a different creature here from the girl I knew
at West Point. Do you remember the night of the hop?"Alice turned her head away and made no reply at first. They were sitting at the foot of the terrace, on the steps leading up from the boat-house. The summer had been very hot and dry so far, and the Delaware was sinking rapidly. Kate sat watching the shadows on the river, and wondering how to broach the subject of the telegram, when she was startled by Alice's voice, with a little ring of hardness in it, saying,
" After all, why not-- m--marry him? I don't want to live in
Stockbridge forever and be narrow and provincial.""Well, dear me, is there no one else except Senator Cobb? What has
become of all the other men in the world since we have been sitting
here? Has a pestilence swept them from the face of the earth?""There is no one else who cares for me," said Alice, bitterly."How do you know?""Mother says so.""Um. Does she?""Yes, she does. And I know that it is true.""Do you! You are very wise."If Kate expected to sting Alice by her tone into either question or
explanation, she was disappointed, for Kate was obliged finally to
say, "How about Gordon Counselman?"Alice turned and faced her vehemently. "There is nothing about
him!" she declared."How do you know? Don't you, in your secret heart, believe that he
loves you?"Kate was not sure that Alice would not plunge headlong into the
river at the open mention of such an indelicate fact. But to her
surprise she found that Alice, like most reticent persons,
occasionally fairly revelled in the opening up of a closed
subject."No, I don't.""Why?""Why? Because I have not had a letter from him for a month. Why did
he stop writing? Why did he promise to come home with George and then
suddenly withdraw his acceptance without any reason or any
explanation?""Why?" repeated Kate, excitedly. "Because your mother wrote to him
and withdrew her son's invitation in such a way that Gordon could not
explain even to George, and there is a coolness between them now,
because George is too proud to ask why, and Gordon too much of a
gentleman to 'show a fellow's mother up to him in an unfavorable
light.' And most of all,
because Mrs. Copeland gave Gordon to understand that you were engaged
to Senator Cobb. That is why Gordon does not
write. Your mother intimated that she wrote in your behalf to break
the news to him."Alice reached out for Kate's hand to steady herself."My mother did that? My mother?"She kept repeating it, as if she could not take it in, and she
looked so dazed that Kate hurriedly put the telegram into her
hand."Read that. Mollie has invited him to our house, and he is coming
to-morrow. To-morrow, do you hear?"Alice read the telegram twice, and laughed hysterically."And Senator Cobb is coming to-night and I shall be engaged by
to-morrow. Don't you see that I can't help myself? Don't you know
that my mother has succeeded in everything she ever undertook in her
life? Don't you know that she will marry me to the senator if it
kills me? I didn't know before how determined she was. but if she has
done all this, I might as well give up at once.""Poor Gordon," said Kate softly.Alice clutched her hand."Do you think he cares?""I know that he cares. I only wish you had been noble enough to
have faith in him--such faith as he would have had in you."Alice shook her head. "I am not noble. I have no faith.""You have no courage, and no hope, either," said Kate, in a vexed
tone.Alice looked up at her humbly."I know--I know," said Kate, hastily. "Perhaps I shouldn't have,
either, in your place. But are you going to give up like that? Aren't
you going to nerve yourself?""What is the use? Don't you know that I am bound hand and foot?
Have you ever contended with my mother? Do you know how futile it
is?""It wouldn't be for me!" cried Kate, wickedly. "I'd just love to
pit my will against hers!""Yours!" said Alice. "Why, her will would grind yours to
powder. Yours makes more noise, but hers is as quiet and deadly as--as
the grave. I should as soon think of contending with Death.""Well, I believe that there is such a thing as contesting the field
with Death," began Kate, boldly. Then she covered her face with her
hands, and a groan burst from her lips. "Oh, God, forgive me for
saying that!" she murmured. "Once I did contest the field with Death,
and Death won.""Oh, dear Miss Vandevoort," cried Alice, put-ting her arms around Kate, and forgetting
herself in a moment, as she always did in the face of another's
trouble.Kate sat up suddenly and took both of Alice's hands in hers, and
looked into her eyes with a look which went clear through the world's
ways, down, down into the girl's soul."Once--how long ago it seems, measured by everything but years!--I
stood just where you are standing now, with the privilege of choosing
my life's happiness or its misery. It was even more in my power to
choose freely than it is in yours. Alice, if I did not love you I
could not tell you this. You don't know why I love you, do you? It is
because you remind me of myself. Once I was as single-hearted as
you. My environments were not like yours, but they fettered me quite
as much, and in the writhing of my spirit to free myself they turned
me into the complex creature I am to-day, with so much of good and ill
warring in my soul that sometimes it frightens me even now,
cool-headed as I love to believe myself. Alice, I was meant to be a
true woman. I feel it, but I couldn't help being influenced, I
couldn't help being dragged down. I couldn't keep my ideals high and
clean when every passer-by dashed them down. So I lowered them inch by
inch myself, until they were on a level with my eyes and I no longer
had to look up to see
them. Then they were not ideals any more. They were my familiars. But
I could not bear their reproachful faces. So I wrapped them in
sophistry and put them further away. I knew they were within reach. I
did not wish to destroy them, but they were only dim, shadowy shapes,
and I tried to forget them, for it hurt me to think of them."I was not happy even then, but I filled every hour so full that I
could not think. I was reckless in those days, afraid to stop and see
where I was. Everybody envied me. I was supposed to be perfectly
happy. I said I was. I tried to believe it. But I never succeeded. In
my heart I hated the ways of society, and loathed myself for
conforming to them."Then I met for the second time a man I once had known and
forgotten. From the moment I knew him I felt how I must appear to
him--how shallow, heartless, worldly. He made me see myself, and oh,
how I suffered! He was so different from the other men I knew, and I
was so proud because he seemed attracted to me. He was a cadet at West
Point, and I had gone up there with my father and mother to spend the
summer."Max never cared for other girls, and I was flattered that I had
won the attentions of the most difficult man at West Point. But it was
only an outward victory, for
although he was always with me, yet he held himself, his real self,
aloof from me. I felt that it was because he did not approve of me,
perhaps because he could not respect me. Love makes a women either
proud or humble, Alice. It humbled me, and this new thought stung me
to the quick. I resolved to make myself different--to be so good that
he would love me. I wanted him to love me. And although I spent the
days and nights in anxiety, I look back on that summer as the happiest
of my life, for no matter how hard the struggle, there is nothing so
sweet as to try of your own accord to make yourself better for the one
you love, when it is all your own secret. I should hate a man who
wanted me to be better!"Most unfortunately for us, Max was poor and I was rich. I really
think that I myself never should have thought of this. But my
father"--and Kate's face flushed at the recollection of it--"my father
said that a gentleman should never feel the lack of money. Absurd as
it sounds to me now, knowing as I do that according to that theory
there are very few gentleman in the world, nevertheless when one is
younger one feels such things much more keenly. I was sensitive and
foolish and young--three most unfortunate things according to my way
of thinking now--and I felt on raw nerves every one of the stings which his keen sarcastic
wit was capable of making at Max's expense."This is not a very noble love story I am telling you, is it Alice?
Make excuses for me, if you can. Not that I excuse myself, but I have
suffered enough since to wipe out every sin I ever committed with
drops of my heart's blood."Max felt the difference in our positions even more than my father
did, although I did not know it, and I was not noble enough, when I
began to love him, to ascribe any virtues to him which I had not seen
in other men. I loved him simply because I could not help myself. I
was walking by sight and not by faith, and just at that time my sight
was not very lofty. I had a contempt for most men. Such hosts of them
had made love to me. Some were too stupid to conceal that my fortune
would be no drawback. Some were too eager, simply because I had
pleased their eye, to deceive even a young girl as to their real
selves. Some were too business-like to satisfy the sentimental side of
my nature. Some were too young for me not to know that I overtopped
them mentally; some too old ever to learn anything new; but most of
them too gross not to repel as sensitive a creature as I, and I
loathed them all for daring to call themselves in love with me. I
suppose they thought they were. I suppose they believed in
themselves. But, to my mind, they never knew the meaning of the word. And so, in spite of
lofty ideals, and wanting to believe in men, the very men themselves
dragged their sex down for me, and lowered my standard of men, and
drove me further and further toward the material side of humanity."So when I would have believed in Max, my worldly wisdom stepped in
and held me back, and made me misjudge him. Then when still he held
off from me in words, while letting me read in every other way, as a
man will, even when he doesn't mean to, that he loved me, my
ease-loving, pleasure-choosing nature revolted against the cruelty and
hardship of loving a man with all my heart who didn't or wouldn't love
me, and I grew angry and suspicious. A man once said to me, when he
was asking me to marry him, 'There was a time when I hated you because
so many other men loved you, and because you made so many men
suffer. I hated you the more because I knew that, if I came near you,
I should love you too, just as blindly and irresistibly as they did. I
made up my mind that I would steel myself against you, and make you
love me, just as hopelessly as men have loved you, and then, when I
was ready, I would turn my back on you as heartlessly as you appeared
to turn yours on them. But your simplicity, where I had expected to
find arts and wiles, disarmed me too completely, and this is the
result.'"That gave me a new point of view; but, Alice, I never had anything
to terrify me so much in all my life. To think that a man, a great,
strong, grown man, who had nothing against me but the fancied wrongs
of other men, should have planned in cold blood the wrecking of my
life--for if he had succeeded I should have gone straight to the
devil, nothing could have saved me--fairly froze my blood with fear. I
felt that instead of expecting any man to be my friend, I must regard
every stranger as a possible foe. And this thing crept into my mind
when Max acted so curiously. Oh, it shames me unspeakably to think
that I ever could have allowed it to enter a heart which pretended to
love such a man as Max!"But the trail of the serpent was even there, and I looked at it
until it grew familiar, and then I acted on the suggestion. I grew
revengeful. I vowed that if he did not already love me, he should come
to it; and if he did love me, he should tell me so."I put my own feelings entirely out of sight. And I made myself
just as attractive to him as I possibly could. I grew reckless, and
encouraged him and lured him on, because it was exciting and different
from anything I ever had encountered before, and because I didn't care
what the consequences might be. I let the future take care of
itself."I could see that he was puzzled and surprised, but attracted. Wherever I led, he followed,
but in silence. His resistance made me even more determined, more
eager, until one day I wrung the truth from him, and he asked me to be
his wife. He said he never had meant to tell me, but I knew that I had
made him, and when he told me how he loved me, and that he had loved
me from the very beginning, I grew ashamed and frightened at
discovering for the first time what it was to be loved by a man, a
real man, not a make-believe or a beast; a man who never had loved
anybody but me, who was no gallant to sigh at the feet of every girl,
but who loved me in the old-fashioned way, which, if I were not such a
worldling that I have grown ashamed to regard love as sacred--that's
what the world does for one, Alice--I should say had something holy
about it."I thank Heaven, as I look back, that I had enough of the eternal
in me to reverence it and accept it and to return it in a degree,
although I was not able to return it in kind, because I had had too
many affairs before. I only wish now that I had been enough of a woman
to be honest with him, and to give him the comfort of letting him know
how I did love him. But I had the coquette's idea of keeping a man's
love by withholding the full expression of it--of never saying that
which he most wanted to hear. And although Max poured his whole
honest, faithful soul out at
my feet, he never knew how dearly I loved him. He knows it now."Once you asked me why I loved West Point. It was because I fell in
love with Max there. He wore the cadet gray. He walked with me down
Flirtation. He danced with me at the hops, and once they serenaded me
with 'Benny Havens,' just as they did you."I think I am foolish for going year after year to a place which
harrows me up and nearly kills me with its memories. But every inch of
the ground is dear to me. I love every bugle-call, which used to mean
so much to us. As I look back, Alice, it seems that I have lived and
died by bugle-calls, for they signalled all our little engagements
with each other, which were so short but so dear to both of us, held
sometimes at the most inconvenient hours; and it was the bugle which
said whether we could be together five minutes or an hour; and I loved
it until once it played 'taps,' 'out your lights,' for the last time
over Max's grave. The lights went out for me then and forever."I wish I could remember where I first met him. I am so jealous of
every memory, now that he is dead, that I would give anything if I
could remember every idle word, and all the jests, and little
half-quarrels, and the joy of 'making up' in those days, before we
knew that we loved each other. He is so much to me now that it seems as if I ought to have felt
him coming, and known him out of all the world. You know where you met Gordon. You remember the
first time you touched his hand, the first look he gave you. Whatever
else you lose, you always will have that memory. Do you know these
lines?"'I wish I could remember that first
day,First hour, first moment of your meeting me,If bright or dim the season, it might beSummer or winter for aught that I can say,So unrecorded did it slip away;So blind was I to see and to foresee,So dull to mark the budding of my tree,That would not blossom yet for many a May.If only I could recollect it--suchA day of days! I let it come and goAs traceless as a thaw of by-gone snow,It seemed to mean so little, meant so much.If only now I could recall that touch,First touch of hand in hand--did one but know!'"When you take up a book of poetry with such verse as that in it,
Alice, you only half read it, no matter how carefully you look at each
word. But when you trip over it by accident, and you have lived it all
out in your heart beforehand, and the poet has only put your soul into
words, then you not only are reading it--you
are living it."Max was not brilliant, but I was desperately ambitious for him, as
I am for myself and for you and for every one I love--ambitious to
make the most of every opportunity, and to wrest from life all that it
has to offer. So you can imagine my disappointment when he suddenly
resigned from West Point to obtain a business position. For a long
time I did not know why. Then I discovered that it was to enable him
to offer me more. He never told me. I accidentally discovered it from
something he said, and I never let him know that I knew, for, while I
was touched beyond words to express, my disappointment was so bitter
at his not understanding me better that I dared not trust myself to
speak of it to him."Quiet men, men who are not brilliant themselves, always love women
like me, and while doing their plodding best, sometimes misunderstand
us lamentably. He never knew that distinction would be infinitely more
to me than wealth. I cared nothing for what I was born into. My
ambition reached out towards the unattainable. But when he made the
sacrifice, mistaken though it was, and made it so gladly because it
was for me, how could I explain it to him? I did not understand his
heroism even then. I had to have a harder lesson to teach me to have
faith in humanity. He always comforted himself by his belief that his
younger brother would
distinguish himself in his stead and win a higher place than Max ever
could have won. His brother was the clever one, and Max idolized
brilliancy, as most silent men do."But Max in a dull, commonplace business was quite different, in
the eyes of the world, from Max in the army. The world said I ought to
do better. The dear, kind, friendly world, which had done so much for
me already, which had transformed me from an impetuous, hopeful,
believing girl into a suspicious, calculating, worldly woman, stepped
in and said it had predicted a brilliant match for me, and shook its
head with a smile--the hateful, patronizing, sneering smile of the
world at the rural idea of any genuine
emotion--over Max's pretensions to my hand. My
hand! Alice, I am telling you honestly, and you know humility is not
one of my virtues, when I say that, to compare the cleanness of my
hand with his, in the horrible clear light of Absolute Truth, I was
not worthy to be his wife. I was frivolous, selfish, a flirt; and if I
am anything else to-day it is because I have lived since by his
life. Whatever I am, I owe to him."I said a moment ago that the world said I ought to do better. It
was the world, largely in the person of my father. I will speak no
harm of the dead. The best I can say of him, and I believe this is the
truth, is that he did not know how gen-uinely Max loved me, and I was too proud--too wicked, I call
it now--to let any one, even Max himself, know how much I loved
him. Oh, what a mistake coquettes make! If only I could have him back
for just one hour, I would trample my pride and my vanity and my
worldliness under my feet, and I would give him, to his heart's
content, the comfort I never once gave him then, of letting him know
that I loved him with all my soul, as I love him now, and as I shall
love him till I die."My father couldn't have known this, could he, Alice? No man could
have been cruel enough to ridicule what we felt for each other, could
he? But, oh, he said so much, and he was so clever with it all! I was
proud and sensitive, and I pretended not to care. But his words cut,
cut down into the quick of my foolish vanity, until I shiver and
shrink even yet at the memory of certain phrases he used. He did not
know what he was doing. Oh, he could not have known!"But I was almost desperate, driven to bay; and when the war broke
out, and Max raised a company, I actually was glad, for I thought that
here was an opportunity for him to distinguish himself, as I was sure
he would."Max gave up his business as cheerfully as if he already had not
sacrificed one of the desires of his life to attain it. 'Duties never
conflict,' he used to say to
me when I rebelled at hard things. Ah, but he was a hero!"He wanted me to marry him before he went. There was where the fine
simplicity of his nature came in, which I was too poor in spirit to
respond to. When once I had persuaded him that the obstacles which had
kept him from speaking had been removed, he believed so utterly in my
truth that he never gave them another thought. He took me at my word,
and believed my nature to be as elementary as his own. It was not all
my fault, Alice. Most men are unworldly naturally, and Max was the
most unworldly of them all. But, oh! the world is a power which women
feel in the most deadly way. We are complex enough to recognize its
influence, but we never can make our position understood to a man. He
frankly turns his back on it and says to a woman, 'I want you, and
that's all there is to it.' But it isn't. Oh, but I'm sick of these
distinctions! I am sick of nay woman nature. I should love to be
primitive, and broad, and daring, as men are. I would use my liberty
to better advantage than they do. If I wore no fetters I would show
people that it was because I did not need them."That was the sort of man Max was. But I could not explain myself
to him, and, Alice, my hesitation was not all
base. It was partly jeal-ousy
for him. I wanted him to win distinction, so that the world would be
obliged to say I had done well. I wanted them to appreciate him--to
see him with my eyes. That's what women like me have to do for the
quiet, unassuming men who love us."So I held off, and promised to marry him when he came home. I told
him to do something great, something to make me proud of him. I tried
to appeal to his ambition; but it was pure patriotism which made him
go and fight for his country. Then I tried to prick his vanity, but he
had none."I never shall forget the way he looked at me. He was so big and
tall, and had that kind way of looking down that most big men
have--the protective look, brought out by a woman's smallness of
stature. Max was so tall that even I seemed little beside him."I knew he was thinking of how I had encouraged him to love me, and
had myself broken down all the barriers his pride had erected between
us, and that now I refused to give him his reward--I refused to live
up to my noble sentiments, only he wouldn't hurt me by saying so. He
only squared his shoulders and drew a deep breath and looked over my
head at the opposite wall, while I stammered and fluttered, not daring
to speak out, and let him despise me."So he went away. He never reproached me. He only turned at the
door and looked back at me, as Lohengrin looks at Elsa when he is
leaving her and says, 'Lebe wohl.' He loved me, faults and
imperfections and worldliness and weakness, too much to lay a
feather's weight upon my happiness. But I have thought since that he
believed in me and forgave me in spite of appearances. Max always did
that. When I used to make speeches to people which were too daring or
too wicked for conventionality, and instinctively looked at Max to see
if he disapproved, he always forgave me by a look before I even could
ask, and always put the best construction upon everything, and said I
didn't mean it, and believed the very best of me always. Oh, Max!"So he went away. I never saw him again. He was killed in his first
battle, trying to rally his men. They were in a panic and it was no
use. But if he had succeeded, it would have saved the day. They told
me that there never was a more desperately heroic attempt made than
his. He forgot himself. He never thought of danger. He was like a lion
when he was roused, and he was killed trying to make his men die like
men. But they were mad with fear and almost rode him down."He did nothing brilliant, Alice, dear. He neither saved the day
nor obtained any glory. He
simply gave up his life doing his duty as Max would do, only
regretting that he had not succeeded better."He lay where he fell for hours, wounded fatally. And when they
finally came to carry him from the field, he knew that there were
scores of others who could be saved, so he refused to go. He must have
lain there nearly all night, suffering alone. When they came in the
morning they found him there, dead. And in his hand was a picture of
me, but it was held so tightly that they had to bury it with him. I am
glad they did. I an glad my face is where my heart is."That was my hero, Alice. That was Max Counselman, Gordon's
brother."As Kate ceased speaking, Alice gave a little cry and leaned her
cheek against Kate's flower-like face in a silence too deep for
words. So they held each other closely and clung together as women do,
looking out over the river with unseeing eyes. Then it was that Alice
realized that perhaps in this lay the message of her life, and that
here and now she had come to her soul's cross-roads.XITHE BATTLE OF STOCKBRIDGESTOCKBRIDGE Society was quite stirred up over the arrival in town
of three noted personages, who became, as was only proper and right,
the personal property of the Copelands and Overshines. One was Senator
Cobb, of Washington, whom the Stockbridge Conservative ineffectually tried to interview on
the approaching election as he stepped off the train, but who
expressly stated that he was here on private business, in so
embarrassed a manner that the reporter, who was an astute young man,
went back to the office of the Conservative and
wrote up the senator's career, ending with the announcement of his
engagement to the lovely daughter of one of our esteemed and leading
citizens, leaving the name blank, and then held it over to await
developments.The other two arrivals were John Vandevoort, of New York, and
Second Lieutenant Gordon Counselman, of the Third Artillery, who were
guests of the Overshines.Gordon arrived in the afternoon, and found Miss Vandevoort waiting
for him with such a radiant face and in so bewitching a gown that
Mollie Overshine, in spite of her vehement admiration for Kate,
strongly disapproved of the way Kate was leading that poor young
fellow on. She kept an eye on Kate every minute. Not a vivacious
movement of that brilliant young woman escaped her; not a tone of
Gordon's voice, pleading with her for something, which Kate was
wickedly but laughingly denying him. Mollie was really vexed with
Kate. "The girl has no heart," she thought. It was only the judgment
of the world upon appearances, and no more severe and no more unjust
than many another verdict of society upon circumstantial evidence. It
is only by knowing the under side of things that we are able to judge
brilliancy gently.Miss Vandevoort was far too clever to allow Gordon to rush to call
upon the Copelands the moment he arrived. She counselled patience both
on account of reason and diplomacy, and Gordon was obliged to admit
the correctness of her advice.The lawn at the Overshines was deep and soft and velvety. Kate had
inaugurated really comfortable rustic chairs, instead of the terrible
back-breaking combination of slats and knots with which many excellent
people strain the Christian forbearance of their guests. This simple
coup d'état trans-formed it for the delightful afternoon hours
into an out-of-door drawing-room. Mollie's tea-table and Kate's
work-stand, a foolish but attractive little thing, just the kind of a
three-legged affair that men ridicule and secretly admire, and always
tip over, stood within easy reach, and here the children adored to
come and talk and be laughed at and spoiled.John Vandevoort, a taller, grander, gentler edition of Kate, sat
watching Peggy, toiling and perspiring over her drawing. Peggy had few
talents. She had to dig and delve for the acquirements which Frances
fluttered over and knew without looking at. Frances was all sentiment,
imagination, and superstition. Peggy was slow and practical and
utterly reasonable. Her round eyes bulged out in wonder at the
caprices and mental flights of Frances, who, much to her disgust,
could never drag Peggy upward, nor even inspire her with a desire to
soar. Metaphorically speaking, Frances always wanted to take the
middle of the road, with plenty of elbow room, and Peggy admiringly
stumbled along some distance behind, bravely swallowing her sister's
dust."I wonder if all that grown people tell children about dying is
true," said Frances, pirouetting about her father and Kate and the
others, in a smart frock and scarlet shoes."I think so," said Colonel Overshine. "What, for instance?""Well, is it true that somebody is dying somewhere in the world
every minute of the day and night?""Yes, that's true.""My! Heaven must be an awfully big place. It must be bigger than
the world, or it couldn't hold them all."Peggy looked up from her drawing, and, pushing the hair out of her
eyes, said judicially, "Well, I don't know, Frances. You must remember
that hell takes care of a good many."Colonel Overshine exploded. "Orthodoxy forever!" he roared."Don't laugh at them," said Kate, biting her lips to no avail; "it
spoils them.""Then why doesn't it spoil you, Aunt Kate, when people laugh at
everything that you say?" asked Frances."It does," answered Kate. "I am dreadfully spoiled, Frances. I'm
perfectly horrid, I think.""Vous êtes un ange!" cried the child, impetuously casting
herself into Kate's arms.Peggy saw nothing in her remark to laugh at. She got up from the
grass and smeared her warm red face with her dirty little hand. She
looked at her drawing critically, not with her head on one side as Frances would have
done, but straight ahead, with her round eyes glued to the
picture. Then she made her way slowly over to Colonel Overshine, and
sidling up to him, she said, politely:"Cousin Chris, I've drawn a picture of you. The upper part is a
very good likeness, I think, 'specially the whiskers. But I had to put
skirts on you. I hope you'll excuse me, because I don't come to
trousers until my next lesson."They all coughed. Peggy would have been much hurt if they had
laughed at her work."Hum, hum!" said Colonel Overshine, burying his red face in his
handkerchief. "Very good, indeed, me dear. And as you say, the
whiskers are uncommonly like. But--er--put me into trousers as soon as
you can, me dear; I feel more at home in them.""Oh, certainly. I forgot, when I began, that I wouldn't know what
to do about your legs. I just happened to think of skirts when I saw
Cousin Mollie sit down by you. I should like to draw Frank. He has
been very kind to me. Do you think he would mind not having any
legs?""Not at all, me dear. Frank being me own son, I can speak freely,
and say he is one of the most accommodating boys I ever saw. If you
have no use for his legs, Peggy, let him go without. The young fellows of to-day have
too many luxuries, anyhow."Frank Overshine was one of those amiable, well-meaning boys who,
with the best heart in the world, always did everything wrong. He was
slow, good, and exasperating. He always lost trains, and lost boats,
and lost everything but his temper. Kate made fun of him unmercifully,
but he adored her in spite of it. She called him "the late Frank
Overshine," at which he only smiled deprecatingly. He was always
planning reform. He was always turning over a new leaf. But he lived
in the land of to-morrow. His intentions, however, were good, only
Kate said he spent the most of his time paving hell. And that saying
almost shocked several members of first families into untimely
graves. Stockbridge never entirely approved of Miss Vandevoort after
that, which gives you a very good idea of Stockbridge."I've just been out to see the Copelands," he announced,
genially. But as he generally had just been out to see the Copelands,
this surprised no one. Nevertheless, they all listened with more or
less interest."How are they all?" asked Mr. Vandevoort. "I thought of going out
there this evening.""Mrs. Copeland sent word that she hoped to see you very soon. I
told her that Mr. Counselman was here, too, and she said she was sorry George was not in
town."Kate smiled wickedly."Senator Cobb is there, I believe?" she said."Yes, he is there now, but he is going on the early train
to-morrow. He wanted to go to-night, but Mrs. Copeland wouldn't let
him.""Why, how sudden!" said Mrs. Overshine. "I thought he meant to stay
several days. I was going to entertain him.""He got a telegram," said Frank, innocently, "calling him back at
once.""Then we ought to call to-night," said Colonel Overshine."Suppose we all go," cried Kate."All right," agreed Frank, with unnecessary promptness."How many times have you been there to-day already?" asked Kate,
mischievously."Only twice. But Mrs. Copeland sent word last night that she wanted
to see me." Frank involuntarily buttoned the top button of his coat
and sat up straighter with the importance of this
announcement. Mrs. Copeland generally treated him with a silent
contempt, which the poor fellow never saw nor felt. But his mother saw
it and felt it and resented it."How is Alice?" she said, kindly, in order to give him an opportunity to speak of her. He
was her only son, and she could not help wanting to lift him over the
hard places."Why, mother, I don't know what is the matter with Alice. I never
saw her stirred up so," he said, with more animation than he generally
displayed. "You know how gentle and sweet she is, and how she never
loses her temper? Well, when I was telling her what Cousin Kate had
planned for the week while John and Mr. Counselman were here, and
said, of course, she was to go everywhere we went, and all that, she
almost stamped her foot--at least I saw it move--and she said her
mother wouldn't let her go, and that she had to dress ninety dolls
this week for that fair the Presbyterian church is going to have.""Ninety dolls!" cried Gordon Counselman."Ninety dolls!" exclaimed everybody else in a breath."Oh, I wish they were all for me," said Frances, modestly."Why, I thought Alice had the candy table," said Kate."She has. This doll table is a new idea.""It will be in her mother's name," murmured Mrs. Overshine, "but,
as usual, Alice will do the work."Kate frowned abstractedly for a moment; then she wandered aimlessly over to Frank, and
under cover of the general conversation she said, in a low tone: "What
did Mrs. Copeland want with you this morning?""She said she sent for me to know if John Vandevoort had come.""Was that all she wanted?""Yes, I think so.""She didn't mention Mr. Counselman's name?""Not that I remember.""Did you?""Oh yes; I told her he was coming this afternoon.""Did you see Alice?""Yes.""Did she say anything about the dolls then?""No; she seemed in unusually good spirits. It was this afternoon
she told me about them. Isn't it too bad she can't go?""Can't go! Wait and see if she doesn't go. Is Mrs. Copeland the
Pope of Stockbridge? I never saw anything so undisputed as her sway,"
cried Kate, indignantly."I never thought of it at all," said Frank, honestly."Of course not. Therein lies the secret of her power. It takes
alien eyes to discover a despot so skilled as Mrs. Copeland."'Don't let anybody hear you say that," begged Frank. "It might get
you into trouble. We have to be so careful what we say.""Thank Heaven I do not live in a small town!" cried hate, raising
her arms above her head. "Stockbridge would kill me in a year. I can't
breathe here. It may suit the children, and it won't hurt them; but,
oh me! the fetters on my spirit!""Well, I don't know about the children. I imagine that they
misbehaved yesterday--in fact, had a regular scrimmage. Suppose you
ask Hortense."Neither Frank nor any one else ever thought of referring the
children's discipline to their father. He was quite helpless before
them, and perhaps none of the family realized this unfortunate fact
quite so poignantly as those astute young persons themselves. They
treated him like an adored bachelor uncle, who was always giving them
presents, and in return got bullied, confided in, ignored, consulted,
and tormented by turns, but never obeyed. Everybody took a hand at
managing them except their father, or, rather, everybody avenged his
or her personal affront on them, and the result of this
go-as-you-please system was that they were as they were.Kate was the only one who had a conscience about them. She always treated them with respect and
confidence, and they returned the compliment with the unstinted fervor
of childhood."I prefer to ask them. They will tell. Frances and Peggy, did you
have a nice time yesterday with Elsie Copeland?""No, Aunt Kate, we had a horrid time," responded Frances, with
cheerful candor. "I consider Mrs. Copeland a most unpleasant old
party."Colonel Overshine shouted."You said so yourself, Cousin Chris," insisted the child. "I heard
you.""Elsie is a very ign'rant girl," observed Peggy, gravely. "She is
lots bigger than Frances, but she has never been anywhere. Just think
of it, Papa, Elsie Copeland has never been anywhere except to
Philadelphia. She's never been to Europe even.""And she isn't half as far in her arithmetic as I am, and she
didn't know what geography was.""And when Frances laughed at her, Mrs. Copeland said Elsie never
could study because she was always sick. That was what started it,"
said Peggy."Started what?" asked John Vandevoort, anxiously."The row between Frances and Mrs. Copeland. But I was in it, too,"
declared the child, honestly. "Because Frances was so mad she couldn't
see, and, of course, she
was talking in French, and Mrs. Copeland couldn't understand her.""Frances Vandevoort," began Mrs. Overshine."Wait a moment, Mollie," said Kate. "Let us see how it began. What
was the very first of it, dearest? Tell Aunt Kate.""Why, it was my accidentally laughing at Elsie because she didn't
know anything. I didn't mean to be rude. But I was talking to them all
at the table. They have dinner in the middle of the day, and let
children come to the table. Oh, I think Stockbridge is too queer and
nice for anything!""Go on with the story," said Kate."Well, I was telling about Japan, and Judge Copeland was listening
just as politely as possible. He is very nice, Aunt Kate. I like him. He said he had never been there, but he asked
questions, and I was telling him about the jinrikishas, and I said to
Elsie it was lots funnier and nicer than the geography says, and she
didn't know what geography was. And I laughed. But I was sorry the
minute I did it, because it made the judge's face get red. I suppose
he didn't want us to see that his child didn't know as much as we did,
and she is bigger than we are. I was just going to say I was sorry I
laughed, when Mrs. Copeland said, 'You are a very rude little girl,
Frances, and if you were not a Vandevoort I would send you from the
table.'""Ah-h!" breathed Kate."Go on," said Colonel Overshine. "Then what?""Nothing for a minute," put in Peggy, slowly. "But you ought to
have seen Frances. Her face got as red as fire, and then it got as
white as the table-cloth. You know how she looks when she is too mad
to speak. She looked as though she was going to cry, too. And that
made me feel so bad and so mad at Elsie's mother that when she said
that about Elsie being too delicate to study, I said she wasn't sick
at all. It was just thinking so. I said she was as well as I was.""Oh, Lord!" cried Colonel Overshine, burying his face in his
handkerchief and rocking himself back and forth. "Those children will
be the death of me. Oh, why wasn't I there to see this thing. Peggy,
me dear, I'm going to take you to the circus. Mollie, I'm going to
give the children a party.""Hush, Chris. Go on, Peggy. What happened then?""Then Mrs. Copeland turned on Peggy," broke in Frances. "And she
looked perfectly furious, and she said, 'Who said that? I know you
have heard some one say that. Tell me who it was.' But it didn't scare
Peggy a particle. She just looked stupid, the way she does when she
wants to, and I hollered out, 'Don't tell, Peggy.' And Mrs. Cope-land said we were the worst
children she ever saw, and that if we were hers, she would whip
us.""Then Frances got down from her chair and threw her napkin on the
floor and stamped on it, and ordered Mrs. Copeland to call Hortense to
take us home. Only she didn't understand French. Then Mrs. Copeland
said to the judge, 'What an awful child! Emily Vandevoort's temper. I
wonder that poor John has not sued for a divorce instead of Emily, and
long ago, too.' Then Frances was raging. She
said, 'Don't you dare speak of my mother's temper, or of my father's
getting a divorce. Your husband ought to get one from you. You wicked
woman. You're worse than my mother.'""In French?" pleaded Colonel Overshine. "Don't tell me she said
that in French?""Yes, and it's a good thing, 'cause Mrs. Copeland looked as though
she could kill her," drawled Peggy."Oh, Frances, why don't you speak more English? Oh, Mollie, me
dear, what a pity the old lady didn't get that.""Oh, but she was in a fury!" Peggy went on. "It didn't show except
in her eyes. But she started for Frances, and I thought France would
run, the way she does from Mamma, but she never moved. Just stood
still and looked at Mrs. Copeland. And she stopped and never touched
her. Frances said, 'Ring the
bell for Hortense.' Mrs. Copeland understood that, because she
pointed. And when Hortense came, we shook hands with the judge, and
said we had had a very nice time, and we kissed Miss Alice, and only
bowed to the others, and came away without finishing dinner.""We shook hands with Gifford too, Peggy," added Frances,
calmly. "He is such a pleasant boy."Mrs. Overshine never thought of referring the trouble to their
father, who was but an anxious on-looker at the scene. But she turned
to Kate."I think you ought to punish them, Kate. They have mortally
insulted Mrs. Copeland. She never will forgive me for this. You see if
she does. I really think you ought to take them in hand.""What good would it do, with Chris going on like a maniac over
them? Look at him now with Peggy. I tell you, Mollie, clever children
have no opportunity to be good and gentle and polite with such an
injudicious family as we are. Besides that, to tell you the truth, in
my secret soul I'm glad the Czar of Stockbridge got answered once in
her life for her impertinence.""That is all right for you, Kate, because you don't live here. But
after you go, I've got to keep on living here. And don't forget for
one moment that Mrs. Copeland will take it all out on me.""Poor Mollie. Well, let us hope that she will take into
consideration that we are Vandevoorts," said Kate, wickedly.Mrs. Overshine had too keen a sense of humor not to relax a little
at Kate's irony. "Nevertheless, for the children's sake, you ought to
punish them," she answered.But Kate shook her head. She remembered the child's face as she
left her.XIITHE COPELAND TERRACEIF Mrs. Overshine had been in Kate Vandevoort's confidence she
never would have permitted her household to call en
masse upon the Copelands, for no sooner had the families fused
than a polite battle royal began between Miss Vandevoort and
Mrs. Copeland, which could not fail to give the victory to Kate.Miss Vandevoort had two ways of managing. One was to make the path
so clear that the most obtuse could not fail of seeing it. The other
was so openly to speak out and tell her plans that all the men and a
few of the women would disclaim any idea of her being politic, and
declare her the frankest creature in the world. The rest of the women
would raise their eyebrows.If the latter were true, hers was the art which conceals art, for
while Mrs. Copeland, by monopolizing Mr. Counselman with an affability
which was completely disarming the unsuspicious young fel-low, and tempting him to think Miss
Vandevoort prejudiced in her sweeping denunciation of this amiable
lady--while he was thus effectually being separated from Alice, with
no signs of any change being compassed, and Alice's face was growing
longer and more disappointed every moment--Miss Vandevoort rose up
from her chair and said:"Mr. Counselman, have you seen that fine view of the Delaware to
be had from the side terrace? But of course not. Judge Copeland, may I
show your precious view to our two strangers? Ah, thank you. Alice,
dear, bring Senator Cobb, and let us show them the most beautiful
sight in the world!"Youth and innocence beamed from her guileless countenance as she
swept aside the ponderously adjusted machinery of her antagonist, and
detached the helpless creatures who were powerless to help
themselves. The senator, with his head down and his hands under his
coat-tails, walking beside Alice, whose face openly betrayed her
discomfort, plainly told to Miss Vandevoort the story of his
rejection, even if she had not known it already from Frank Overshine's
ingenuous recital.In seating themselves on the boat-house steps, Gordon had no
difficulty in placing himself beside Alice. He needed only half a
chance; but no unwarned man is a suitable antagonist for a pre-determined woman. Besides that,
it is said that even Jove nods upon occasions; but if Venus ever did,
the record has been lost.In the half-light of the setting sun, which charitably did its best
to conceal the pitiful lowness of the river, the tiny islands which
had risen to view as the river sank, and the smallness of the stream
which crept silently by where it once had flowed with a proud crest,
no one would have taken in all the defects of the Delaware, had not
Miss Vandevoort, with the Hudson in her mind's eye, waved her hand and
said:"Fine locality for a river, is it not, Gordon?""The poor Delaware," said Alice, softly. "I feel so sorry for
her. She has done her best, but Fate was against her. She has only
succumbed because she was obliged to.""That is only why the most of us succumb," said the senator,
bitterly. "Fate is against us all.""I only wish some good heavy rains would stay the hand of Fate in
our lives as completely as it would in the case of the river," said
Gordon, cheerfully. "But I don't believe in Fate. Do you, Miss
Vandevoort?""I don't know," she answered slowly. "I believe in something--I
think I call it Destiny. It is not quite so pagan.""Oh, I wasn't speaking seriously," said Gordon. "Of course we all
know Who orders our lives."Miss Vandevoort turned her head away abruptly. How like Max to avow
what he believed so fearlessly!"Look up there," she cried, pointing. "See the red in the river,
and the black shadows, and the silver haze on the opposite shore, and
the purplish light on the trees. Isn't that a lovely picture?""What a beautiful, misty look it has," said Gordon. "It is like a
Corot.""Only in a Corot we call that haze atmosphere, but in Pennsylvania
we call it malaria," said Kate. When she was deeply moved, Miss
Vandevoort always was most frivolous.She rose as she spoke, and stood looking at the river
absently. Then she went farther down the steps and paused. She knew
they were watching her. She knew they thought her absorbed in
something she saw. But the truth was, she was trying so skilfully to
leave them alone that they would not know they had been left. Lovers
are delicate objects to handle.Again she paused, and looked over her shoulder at Senator Cobb. It
made him think she wanted him. He had no idea that Mr. Counselman was
interested in Alice, or possibly he would not have been so amiable. He
merely thought, as Gordon
was in the way and he could not see Miss Copeland alone, that he might
as well follow Miss Vandevoort. She always amused him. That was one
reason why most men were willing to follow her. She always amused
everybody."I love Miss Vandevoort," said Alice, impulsively, as they watched
her retreating figure."Do you?" said Gordon, smiling. "I believe I almost do myself. I
owe her a great deal. It was she who obtained my appointment at West
Point. I had no influence at Washington, but I was appointed by the
President. My brother Max hoped to be able to manage it, because he
was ambitious for me. You know Max was engaged to Miss Vandevoort, and
I think that is the reason she has never married. She is a great
belle, and always has been. I have heard my mother say that Miss
Vandevoort could have occupied almost any position she wanted, so many
really superior men have been in love with her. I suppose it is
true--women know so much more about those things than men. I know the
fellows at West Point go crazy about her every time she comes
there. She never has been the same since my brother's death. I tell
you, Max was a fine fellow. The sweetest thing about Miss Vandevoort
is the way she has done so many things that Max intended to do. Now
she knew Max wanted me in the army. And one day she said to me, 'Would you like to go to West
Point?' Before I thought, I said, 'I'd rather go there than to do
anything else in the world.' That was all. She just smiled. We never
spoke of it again. But she was a great friend of the President's, and
visited at the White House every winter. The next year I was
appointed. That's the way she does things.""It is just like her," said Alice."Yes," said Gordon, "it is just like her. Do you know, even yet I
can't get used to thinking of Max as dead. Whenever I see Miss
Vandevoort I think he ought to be there with her. She never talks
about him, but once, when we had a long conversation after some people
had worried her with their gossip, she said, 'Knowing your brother has
put other men out of the question for me.' I wish that he could have
lived--for her sake. Still, I suppose it isn't right to say such
things."He broke off abruptly and shook his head, as he always did when
anything bothered him.There was a silence between them for a moment. Then Gordon
said:"I never was so glad to see any one in all my life as I was to see
you this evening.""Were you? I hardly thought you would come the first day you were
in town."Gordon laughed."I wanted to come this afternoon--I should have liked to come
straight from the train, but Miss Vandevoort wouldn't let me.""I suppose she thought it wouldn't have been proper.""No, that wasn't the reason.""What was it, then?""I am afraid to tell you.""Perhaps I know already," said the girl, flushing. "I have done you
an injustice in my thoughts, but--it was not my fault.""You couldn't help it," he declared. "I don't blame you. But I
couldn't write again.""No," said Alice. "Certainly not. But--""But what?""Nothing."Gordon reached out timidly and took her hand. Alice made a
faint-hearted effort to withdraw it, then left it there, and for a
moment they sat there in silence. Alice was frightened, but
tremblingly happy. She felt that her secret was slipping away from
her, and passing into the keeping of the one from whom she would have
hidden it the most carefully; and yet she did not care. For the first
time in her life she was indulging in an emotion unrestricted by
anybody or anything. For the first time she was letting herself go. It
had all the intoxication of a timorous daring to the little Quaker maiden. And when Gordon said, "I
love you, Alice, dear," it sounded so natural, so exactly as if he had
been saying it forever, that she smiled at him with all her heart in
her eyes, and the gates of Paradise swung open for another pair of
pilgrims from earth.It was so delightful to go back to the very beginning and talk it
all over, and to tell each other everything they had not dared to
mention at the time."And you were the prettiest girl at the hop," Gordon declared. "I
think you are the prettiest girl I ever saw.""Oh, nobody ever called me pretty before," disclaimed Alice."Then I don't see where their eyes have been.""But I shouldn't have liked it if they had.""Well, I shall say it as often as I please, and you must listen,
because I can't help myself. You never looked as lovely as you do
to-night.""To-night? In this old dress?" cried Alice.It was the first time she had worn it, but being in love would
breed coquetry in a vestal virgin."Nobody was ever so happy as we are, were they?" asked Gordon."I don't see how they could be. I never was happy at all before, so
I am no judge of it.""You never were? Why, I have been happy al-ways. Not, of course, like this. But I have found
world beautiful and people good, and I've always had plenty to be
thankful for.""I have had all that," said Alice; "yet somehow I have always just
missed happiness. The nearest I ever have come to it has been when my
father and I have been studying or talking together alone.""My dear little girl! I will give all the rest of my life to trying
to make you happy. I hate to think that you have missed it all this
time.""I don't know what there is in the future," said Alice. "But I wish
things would always stay just as they are now.""Oh," said Gordon, laughing, "we should get tired of boat-house
steps and summer evenings and the river view. I want to think of a
home of my own, and you for my wife, and of your coming to the door to
tell me good-bye when I go away, and of your meeting me there when I
come back. I am stationed at Fort Hamilton, and I know you will like
it there.""I?" cried Alice. "Oh, you don't mean soon?""Why not? My position is secure. I know exactly what I have to
offer you, and why need we wait?""My mother--" began Alice.Gordon squared his shoulders."Yes, I know," he said. "I suppose she will want you to wait.""I am afraid she won't--""Won't what?""Let me have you at all." Alice blushed violently over the temerity
of that speech, but the darkness was friendly."Oh, but she must!" said Gordon, vehemently. "You have promised
me. And I believe you.""You may believe me," cried Alice. "She must not separate us."Gordon smiled confidently.Mrs. Copeland was not used to direct methods in anything. She
delved and circumnavigated so much that frankness upset and hurry
completely finished her.Gordon came to ask for Alice the next day--the very next morning,
if you please--and suggested being married in the autumn.He found the judge first, and made his avowal so frankly, as if
expecting him to understand why he could not help loving Alice, and
his youth and honesty were so appealing, that the judge forgot for one
moment his wife and the senator from Ohio, and gave his consent before
he realized what he was doing.Armed with this, Gordon, with slower steps, sought
Mrs. Copeland.She was sitting unsuspiciously in her morning-room, with her fancy work. Her manner when
Gordon came in was almost cordial; but when he plunged at once into
the heart of his subject, and she discovered what had taken place, her
anguish and disappointment and hurt pride at being outwitted were so
intense and so confusing that she took refuge in such pleading with
Gordon not to marry Alice, not to rob her of her dearest, almost--now
that she was about to lose her--her only child, that in an ordinary
matter Gordon would have yielded. But coming as he did from a
healthy-minded, normal family, it struck him as such an impossible
proposition that he was obliged to make an effort to take her
seriously. Mrs. Copeland watched his ingenuous face like a hawk, from
behind her handkerchief, and inwardly chafed to read in it only pity
and kindness, but not a ray of indecision. Her pleadings were so
anguished, however, that Gordon said:"My dear Mrs. Copeland, I am very sorry. I can understand how you
love Alice, because I love her myself. But--excuse me for saying
so--you could not expect to keep her always.""I do expect to keep her always. I want my child's love.""You have that, dear Mrs. Copeland. And you always shall. I never
saw a more devoted daughter than Alice is to you.""Ah, but I have been a devoted mother. Don't forget that,
Mr. Counselman. I want my children around me always.""But George tells me that he is to live at home here after he
marries Miss St. Francis, so you will gain a daughter for the one you
lose.""You are not a mother, Mr. Counselman--"Gordon threw his head back and laughed."No, Mrs. Copeland, I am not.""How can you jest, sir, upon so serious a subject.""I didn't, Mrs. Copeland. It was you.""I never jested in my life. Well, laugh away, young people. The
time will come soon enough when you will weep.""Then may I have Alice?""It seems to me that you are taking her, anyway. I have nothing to
say about it."Gordon looked a trifle hurt."I will do my best to make her happy," he said, looking down."There is very little happiness in the world, young man. If you
look, you will see more heartaches than smiles.""I don't look for the heartaches," said Gordon, honestly. "And I
see the smiles without looking.""Alice will not be happy with you long. The tears will come and
they will come on your ac-count. It is always so. The woman suffers; the man
laughs.""I hope not," said Gordon, vehemently. "I am going to be good to
Alice always. I hope you believe that.""You mean it now," said Mrs. Copeland."May I see Alice?" asked Gordon."I don't know where she is," she answered, without looking up."Then I'll find her, if you will allow me."She did not notice his leave-taking, or see his proffered hand. He
looked unusually tall and broad-shouldered as he walked away.He found Alice down by the boat-house, and took her in his arms
without a word. Alice read his face and asked no questions. She knew
that he had conquered, and she guessed at what he had undergone."Alice," he said at length, "I wish you knew my mother."XIIIALICE'S WEDDING-DAYFor the dramatis personæ, a marriage
engagement is an uncomfortable contrivance in many ways. Like the
misunderstood honeymoon, it is easier for an outsider to weave
romances about its perfect bliss than it is for the courageous
participants, who are simply trying to live it down.If you are engaged to a man of wealth and station, you have to
fight to make people believe you love him--if you really do. If you
are engaged to a poor man, when your fond relatives had predicted a
brilliant match for you, you cannot even take the comfort of throwing
yourself heart and soul into your trousseau, because you have to stop
now and then to dangle your love for your fiancé before their eyes, in order to assure
them that it will stand the stress of economy. So that there is no
balm in Gilead.Mrs. Copeland made Alice's a period of mourning. It so nearly
shattered her always frail consti-tution that she never was a well woman afterwards. All
Stockbridge knew this, and marvelled in her presence at the wonder and
mystery of mother-love.There are traditions of women to whom their engagement was the
period of bliss for which books are the authority. But books are so
misleading. There are other women who would not live through it again
for anything--even to acquire the husbands whom its trials
purchased.Alice Copeland suffered an agony of apprehension through every hour
of hers. She never knew at what moment the thread of her mother's
patience would snap. She never was certain that Mrs. Copeland would
let her marry Gordon. So many things conspired against
her. Mrs. Copeland seemed to have taken a violent dislike to the army,
and daily regretted that George was so unhappy as to be in its
infantry service. It shows the superb discipline of her household that
no one dared or even wished to mention the fact that she had sent him
there against every one's wishes--even his own.The several unfortunate things which had befallen army officers
during her lifetime were rehearsed at breakfast every morning, Alice's
only defence being that, at least, none of them had occurred recently,
or to any member of Gordon's class.But in reality, since knowing Mr. Counselman and discussing family
trees with him, Mrs. Copeland had no more intention of breaking off
the match than Alice herself. But neither Gordon nor Alice knew
this. Gordon came to know the descent of the Giffords as well as he
did that of the Copelands, which is saying a great deal. He once had
been foolish enough, encouraged by a question of kindly interest from
the judge, to offer a few facts concerning the Counselmans, and the
not inglorious part they had played in the making of America's
history. But he was met by such a roaring torrent--no, the mass was
frozen and of majestic slowness--such an iceberg of ancestral history,
proving the Giffords to have been descended directly from protoplasm,
and each the most perfect lady and the most perfect gentleman of his
time and kind, that Gordon was more than convinced that Mrs. Copeland
was a lady. In fact, she admitted it herself.When the preparations for the wedding ceremony were in progress,
Alice was cheered in spite of herself. She knew that her mother's
pride would allow nothing to interfere then. She even caught herself
singing once or twice; but the reproachful look in Mrs. Copeland's
face was sufficient to make her stop instantly, and to cling to her
mother in a real and somewhat remorseful affection, to think that she could be willing to
leave her for anybody--even for Gordon.Two days before the wedding the papers were full of the suicide of
Giles Pratt, Second Lieutenant of the One Hundred and Ninth
Infantry. It was said to be a very sad affair, and a second great blow
to the family, the first having been the failure of Mr. Pratt's father
some three months before. The details of the unhappy affair were not
made public, but something quite mysterious was hinted at.Alice hardly breathed when she heard of it. She even thought of the
daring idea of defying her mother, if Mrs. Copeland should pronounce
this an impassable obstacle to her marriage. But Mrs. Copeland was a
woman capable of lofty surprises. She glossed it over with a mental
wave of her hand, which almost made Alice sick with relief, the
revulsion of feeling was so great.Of course Kate Vandevoort came down for the wedding. And so did her
brother, because Frances and Peggy were to be flower girls, and strew
the path of the bridal couple with the roses which Mrs. Copeland
openly predicted would soon turn to rue.Many guests came clown from New York, and all the Giffords from
Philadelphia came. Excellent people they were, with sterling
principles and large bank accounts, and clothes four seasons
behind the times. That was the
Scotch of it--to buy good firm material which wore like iron, and then
to wear it out.There were people from Washington and Fortress Monroe and Fort
McHenry and Fort Hamilton, where Gordon was stationed, and the first
families of Stockbridge were there in force. There never was a prouder
day for the Presbyterian church or for the Stockbridge Conservative, whose veracious chronicle of the
brilliant affair is still preserved in the scrap-books of several
maiden aunts who were there and who saw it all."Alice, my dear," cried Kate, who was maid of honor for the--but
Kate declared she had lost track of the number--"fancy who is
here?""Oh, I don't know. Tell me.""Senator Cobb and his bride! Now try to imagine who his bride
is. Mrs. Verry! Yes, honestly. I want to know if you ever in all your
life heard of anything so delicious!""I think it is pathetic," said Alice."I came to help you dress. Let me do that for you. Are you nervous?
Alice, that woman is a genius. The senator no more wanted to marry her
than he wanted to marry his grandmother. But she made him think he
did. Oh, but she is clever! I always have said that a man could marry
any woman he wanted to--given equal conditions--and now I shall forever afterwards add that a
woman can marry any man she wants to. Oh, what a dear, beautiful,
funny old world this is!""I don't see how you can admire anything that Mrs. Verry does. I
think she is horrid.""Admire her! I admire her just as I admire Napoleon or Cæsar
or Alexander--anybody who worked against fearful odds and succeeded. I
may not admire everything about them, nor approve of all their
methods, but I reverence their perseverance and their genius. Now,
only I know what odds Mrs. Verry worked against, for I have heard
Senator Cobb express his opinion of her, in days gone by, in no very
complimentary terms. I am racking my brain to know what line of action
she could have employed to change him and do everything up so
speedily."Kate paused a moment in deep thought. Alice thought her serious
interest in this affair but another of Kate's whimseys. It was of no
more moment to Alice than as if she never had seen Senator Cobb. But
to Kate it was a problem which must be grappled with and solved before
she could rest."You must admit that it is rather superb of her, Alice.""How superb?""Why, to marry a man you discarded and show him off at your wedding. It was a coup d'état. I thought I would warn you
before you saw them.""I don't see any coup d'état in it,
and I didn't need any warning. I shouldn't care if all the men I know
had married all the women I know and brought them all to my wedding. I
shouldn't even see them.""Oh, Alice, you are so queer.""Have you seen Gordon since you have been here?""Yes, I saw him yesterday. I think that she touched his
vanity. That is his weakest point.""Whose? Gordon's?""No; Senator Cobb's.""Oh! Did he tell you about it?""Did Senator Cobb tell me about it? Mercy, child, I haven't seen
him.""I meant Gordon.""Oh no; John told me. They are on their wedding journey. They are
going to Niagara. Gordon will hardly allow me to speak of it. I asked
him yesterday if he had heard of it, and he said it was infamous. Now,
what made him show so much feeling about it? Do you think it possible
that Gordon was ever jealous of Senator Cobb?""No. No, indeed. He knows that I disliked him intensely.""Then I don't know what made Gordon look so stern about it. There,
dear, you look lovely.""Thank you so much for coming to help me. I did not like the idea
of dressing alone on my wedding-day. Mrs. Overshine came to dress me,
but mother needed her the most, and I could get along well enough with
a maid.""You are an unselfish little thing, Alice. Tell me, have you got
on
Something old and something new,Something borrowed and something blue?'
That's for luck, you know. I always have to attend to my bride's luck.""No, I haven't," said Alice, uneasily."What? Oh, you are reckless with your future, Alice. We must remedy
that instantly. I never should dare to be married without.""I chose Wednesday," said Alice."Of course. Wednesday is the only day for a wedding."Both girls were quite serious, Kate half laughing at herself, yet
conforming to the old rhyme. The most sensible women are superstitious
about love affairs.'Now, Alice, here is a pearl heart which Gordon's mother sent with
her best love and the hope that you would wear it at your wedding. I
know you did not intend to wear
any jewels, but will you wear this?""Yes, indeed. 'From Gordon's mother!' Oh, Miss Vandevoort, don't
you think I am the most fortunate girl in the world?""Yes, dear, and I hope you and Gordon will be as happy as you
deserve to be."Something in Miss Vandevoort's face as she was fastening the pearl
heart in its place made Alice put her arms around her, in a sweet
little way of hers, and whisper: "Dear Miss Vandevoort, you are so
good to come to my wedding! It must be very hard for you."Kate's lips quivered as she shook her head, saying: "Now, is there
anything else I can do for you?""Nothing, except to leave me for a few minutes. I want to be all
alone just before I am married."Kate took Alice in her arms and kissed her. Then she went out and
closed the door softly. She knew that Alice was kneeling beside her
little white bed in her wedding-dress.It was a military wedding. All the ushers and George Copeland, as
best man, were in the full-dress uniform of the United States
army. The bridesmaids were as pretty as newspapers always declare them
to be. The ceremony was fifteen minutes late, as was perfectly
proper--a ceremony on time
looks like quite indecent haste. Frances and Peggy, who insisted on
walking backwards in front of the bride, as they once had seen flower
children do at a wedding in New York, had practised the difficult feat
so successfully all their lives that they performed their part with a
self-possession and savoir faire which made
Elsie Copeland thrust her head behind her mother in their front pew in
vicarious nervousness.Alice rose to the occasion in a wonderful way. She was paler than
usual, but she seemed to have forgotten her surroundings. Kate, from
the altar, watched her progress down the aisle on her father's
arm. She fixed her eyes upon Gordon and waked towards him as if on
wings, forgetting where she was, forgetting that people were looking
at her and whispering about her, forgetting everything except that
this was the happiest hour of her life, because she never again was to
be anything but Gordon Counselman's wife.Kate never could have lost herself like that. Miss Vandevoort could
love more deeply than Alice, but she always kept her head. She always
knew where the hem of her gown was, and how her train was hanging, and
that people were looking at her. It was a subconsciousness, entirely
beyond her control and in no way interfering with the deep experiences
of her life, yet because she
talked about it people called her frivolous. Frivolity in women like
Miss Vandevoort is but the casket enclosing jewels which only are
shown to those who deserve to see their value.The pause came, and the great hush, and the responses, and the
shifting of figures around the altar, and the ring given and received,
and then a burst of music, which announced that the wedding, the great
event, was over, and Mr. and Mrs. Gordon Counselman were coming down
the other aisle, with everybody turning and half rising to see their
faces as they passed.XIVAT FORT HAMILTONFORT HAMILTON faces the sea. From the officers' quarters you look
across the immense parade-ground, bounded on two sides by the harbor
and the ocean, and see the ships come sailing in, and watch with eager
interest the coming and going of the little government steamers.To Alice it was an enchanted land. She was sufficiently her
father's daughter to love the glorious stretch of water which makes
Fort Hamilton a blissful spot for those who love the sea, and Gordon
was prouder to have secured a seaport station, because she seemed to
love it so, than he was of his West Point record which sent him into
the artillery.Alice found herself facing a responsibility for the first time in
her life. And though it was of the simplest description, she went on
depending upon Gordon and asking his advice about the veriest trifles,
just as she had been doing all her life with her mother.Gordon knew quite as little as she, but he was adaptable and self-reliant, and so supplemented Alice
in quite a delightful and satisfactory way. One shudders to think what
might have occurred had he been otherwise.Except for all the other helpless women in the world who marry and
go to housekeeping profoundly versed in ignorance of practical
affairs, Alice would have been extraordinary in this line. Not that
she had been idle all her life. Far from it. She had fetched and
carried for her mother until it was second nature for her to thrust
pillows behind people's backs and tuck footstools under their
feet. And many persons unaccustomed to these gentle ministrations, who
visited her in her new home, were so touched by her thoughtfulness
that they cheerfully sat for hours with their knees too high for
comfort, rather than reject her little props.She played sweetly upon the piano, and the officers' wives at Fort
Hamilton were glad to avail themselves of Gordon's voice and Alice's
little tum-ti-turn accompaniments, which were so gentle and so
seriously performed, and offered, as it were, with such a spirit of
devotion before the shrine of her idol, that somehow it brought tears
to your eyes to hear them. Or, if it did not go that far, perhaps it
just made the bridge of your nose ache, which is the only
stopping-place this side of tears for the pathos in the under side of
things.Alice, too, understood certain branches of cookery. She made
delicious gruels and delicate custards, and when Gordon made fun of
them, and expressed himself violently in favor of soups and roasts,
Alice almost sighed to think how well and strong he was, so that she
never might look forward to cooking her dear little messes for an
invalid husband.Mrs. Copeland sent Elsie down to visit Alice, and then this
precious gift of sick-room cookery came so strongly into prominence
that Gordon himself got a leave at the end of two months and took her
home again."Mother does not like it because we did not keep her all winter,"
sighed Alice. "She said she thought the sea-air would be
beneficial.""So it would if either of you ever got any of it," answered
Gordon. "But you never left the house for days at a time.""I couldn't leave poor little Elsie.""Then why didn't Elsie go out with you?""Oh, she didn't want to."Gordon made no reply. He only began to sing:"Commentators tell usThat when from earth we goWe'll follow the same handicraftWe followed here below.If this be true philosophy--(The parson he says no),What days of dance and song we'll haveWith Benny Havens, O!"It was a whole year before Alice discovered that Gordon sang "Benny
Havens" as an outlet for all the emotions that flesh is heir to. At
first she thought he sang it because he was musical.Alice importuned Miss Vandevoort in every letter to come and see
their new home, but Kate held off on one pretext or another. "Wait
until you get well used to each other's ways," she wrote, "so that you
will not have to ask the bride-and-groom questions at the table which
are so embarrassing to a person of my delicate sensibilities. At
least, wait until you get used to each other's tempers. That will take
a year. If you are not quarrelling at the end of a year, I will
come."But at the end of a year she would not come. She had spent most of
the winter in Washington, and Alice wrote her an enthusiastic letter
telling her of Gordon's promotion to be First Lieutenant, and begging
her to come and celebrate with them.Kate telegraphed them from Denver. She was with a party of her
English friends in a private car, en route for
California. She would come when she got back.But it was two months after her return before she really came.Alice was enchanted when she had Kate actually in her own home. She
showed her everything. hate could see that the house had been set in
order as if for a guest of honor, and Alice even had robbed her own
room to make Kate's more attractive.Nearly all the officers of the post called the first evening she
was there, and Alice never had seen Kate as brilliant as she was that
night. She was almost too brilliant. She sang with Gordon and played
with Alice, but there was something wrong with her wit. It sounded
reckless to Alice. She kept watching the clock, and suddenly broke off
what she was saying to Captain Fisher to dash into a spirited march
which drowned conversation and set every one's feet to tapping with
her marked time. But in the midst of it the bugle sounded "taps"--"Out
your lights," "Out your lights"--and Kate's hands fell with a crash on
the keys."Oh, don't stop!" they cried."She's forgotten the rest of it," said Alice, nervously. "She
always stops there. She doesn't like the last part. I'll play for
you.""It is odd how so excellent a performer as Miss Vandevoort should
break down in the middle of a thing like that," said Mrs. Fisher to
Gordon. "It is her temperament, I
think. She plays with a nervous tension. One of the most sympathetic
and brilliant pianists I ever knew seldom managed to play a piece
through. She nearly always broke down.""Yes," said Gordon, watching Alice and Kate and wondering what was
up, "I have heard of such things.""Oh, they happen very frequently," declared Mrs. Fisher, thinking
that her husband had been talking to that handsome Miss Vandevoort
quite long enough, and deciding to go home at once.Kate stayed one day more, then she told Alice she must go."I can't stay, Alice, dear. You know why."Alice, who had been most importunate about her coming, helped her
to make ready to go. Gordon was loud in his expressions of
dissatisfaction."I thought you could put up with our little makeshifts longer than
two days," he said, mischievously. "I am afraid you, are what they
call in books 'a spoiled beauty.'""I am just that," laughed Miss Vandevoort. "Spoiled in the
making.""And it is because of your dear little makeshifts that I can't
stay. They are driving me away," she whispered to Alice, as she kissed
her good-bye."I am going back to Paris. One can forget everything real in
Paris.""She said I was changed, Gordon," said Alice, when Kate had
gone."She meant improved. She told me so.""She said lovely things about you, Gordon. But I don't need to have
outsiders tell me how good and clever you are. I see it for myself.""Oh, Alice, you would spoil a fellow. But I must say I would rather
have my wife think me good and clever than to have everybody else in
the world think so if she didn't."Alice came and sat on the arm of his chair, and he pulled her fancy
work out of her hands, and tossed it on the table."You don't like fancy work?" said Alice."I don't like to see you doing it. I would rather see you with a
book.""But I never read so much in all my life as since I have been
married. And it has been lovely; lovelier even than to read with
father. You are so interesting to talk with afterwards."Gordon smiled at her derisively."No, now there is no danger of my spoiling you," she insisted. "You
would have been spoiled long ago if flattery would do it. But you are
so busy doing things for other people, and making fun, that you never seem to have time to notice what
an attractive man you are.""Am I an attractive man?" asked Gordon, solemnly."Very!" laughed Alice. "All the women are positively silly over
you, only you never see it. You could have plenty of flirtations if
you wanted to.""By Jove, Alice, you are changing with a vengeance. I never heard
you talk about flirtations before. It sounds too much like your
friend, Mrs. Cobb.""Not my friend, Gordon. Yours. She doesn't care that for the
senator. She wants other men around her all the time.""I don't see what people marry for, if they are going to keep on
wanting attentions from other people. Why, the most wonderful woman in
the world is not as attractive to me as my own wife."Alice bent over and kissed him. She had not lost her old trick of
blushing."How Miss Vandevoort would make fun of us if she could hear how
silly we are," she said."It isn't silly for a man to make love to his own wife," said
Gordon, stoutly. "This world would be a better place if more men did
it.""Miss Vandevoort says it doesn't last. She says it is the woman
whom the man does not marry that he often loves the best.""Miss Vandevoort's cynicism is the most amusing thing in the world
when you know her. If ever there was a girl capable of making the
sweetest wife in the world, except you, it is Miss Kate. But that
sounds just like her. She only does it to cover how deeply she really
feels. But she mixes me all up, she is so sudden and so brilliant. She
addles my brain.""Just as if anybody could do that," said Alice, fondly. "Tell me;
was there anybody else in your case--anybody you didn't marry?""Anybody I didn't marry? Oh, yes; several. I only married you. I
left a lot of girls for the other fellows.""No, Gordon; don't joke. You know what I mean. Was there anybody
you ever loved except me--anybody you ever think of when you sit and
smoke with your eyes shut?"Gordon flung his head back and laughed."Miss Vandevoort put that into your head," he declared."No, she didn't. It was Mrs. Cobb.""Well, it does sound too decadent for Miss Kate. Her cynicism is
more normal and healthy, and is always funny. Mrs. Cobb's is more like
the trail of a serpent. I don't believe I care to have you see much of
her, Alice.""You are evading me," said Alice. "I asked you a question and you are trying to get my mind off the
subject.""My dear wife, are you serious?""Yes, I am. I want to know if you ever loved any other woman except
me?""Yes. I love another now. But it's my mother, I meant. Alice,
child, how foolish of you to turn pale.""I told you I was in earnest.""Well, then, I will answer you. There is no one now, and there
never was any other woman or girl in the world I ever wanted for my
wife but you. I thought you knew that.""Truly, Gordon?""Truly, Alice. I never loved anybody but you.""Oh, Gordon, you are such a dear!""Now may I shut my eyes when I smoke?""Of course," said Alice, laughing, with a shamed face.As Kate Vandevoort said, the Counselmans were so normal."Gordon, you are worried about something.""How do you know, dear?""You sigh, and you are getting an up-and-down wrinkle between your
eyebrows that only goes away when I rub it like that, and you shake
your head this way.""You have sharp eyes, little girl.""Tell me what it is.""Oh, it's nothing much. Just those debts. I hate to owe money.""What debts, Gordon?""Those I told you about.""Oh, yes. I remember. But you never told me what they were
for.""I indorsed a fellow's note, and he failed to pay it.""Why couldn't he?""He died.""Then it must have been Mr. Pratt. Tell me, was it Mr. Pratt?""Yes.""I wonder what it was for? Mrs. Cobb told me a wife ought never to
question any debts her husband contracted before he married her.""Mrs. Cobb--" began Gordon, violently."Oh, Gordon, Gordon! What is the matter ? What makes you look
so?""Don't quote Mrs. Cobb to me, Alice. I--I--think it would be better
not to.""Gordon, how you frightened me. Sometimes I think you hate
Mrs. Cobb. Why, even I only dislike her. What makes you, dear?""I think she is a wicked woman, and utterly without principle. I--I
can't tell you what she has done, or how I know it. I hope there are
pal-liating circumstances that I
don't know of. Otherwise the injury she did a friend of mine, I could
hardly forgive.""Oh, Gordon dear. I never will refer to it again. I did not know
that you really had anything against her. Tell me about those
debts. Do you owe any more than just what you told me about?""No, dear; that is all, but surely it is enough.""But Gordon, only that little bit? Why, I can get you the money. My
father will give it to me.""Alice Counselman!""Well, he will lend it to me then, if you are so proud.""Look here, Alice, I wouldn't have told you if I had thought you
would suggest such a thing. You knew you were marrying a poor man, who
could only offer you a soldier's pay.""Well, have I ever regretted it or wanted anything different?""No, dear love, you have not. You seem happier here in this little
house with nothing in it than you ever did with all the lovely things
in that big house of your father's.""Nothing in it? When you are here the whole world is in it for
me.""No furniture, I meant. I don't count myself furniture.""Yet you furnish the house more than anything else," laughed
Alice. "A sorry looking place it would be without you.""Well, I come under the head of useless decorations, together with
the parlor clock and your hanging baskets.""Don't you make fun of my little house. I think it is prettier than
any of the other officers'. And it cost so little.""That's its chief beauty," laughed Gordon."It was your cleverness that did it. Would anybody but you have
thought of having that little, old, crooked Japanese cabinet-maker
make us a set of parlor furniture out of bamboo, and the whole thing
costing less than one of the chairs in my room at home?""We don't mind if the sticks run into people's backs so that our
company only stay a few minutes, or, if they come again, say they
prefer to stand up?""Oh, it isn't as bad as that. Of course they are not the most
comfortable things in the world; but who ever sits in a parlor,
anyway?""Nobody.""And doesn't everybody think those hammocks in the library are the
most amusing and the queerest conceit in the world, and doesn't it put
everybody at their ease immediately to sit in a hammock with
anybody?""It does.""Well, whose idea was that?" demanded Alice."Mine.""Well, then, aren't you clever and nice and lovely, and am I not
the happiest girl in the world?""You certainly are the most attractive to me. But listen
now. Wouldn't you really rather have a nice set of black hair-cloth
furniture for the parlor, with this good, slippery kind of a sofa,
that you sort of skate around on without half trying, and a marble
centre-table with a red-plush album on it to hold family photographs,
and a case of wax flowers on the mantel, and a motto, 'What is home
without a mother?' worked in green, to hang over the door?""Gordon, don't make fun of your brother officer! Perhaps they are
just as happy eating from a red table-cloth, 'because it looks so
cheerful,' as we are.""Who is making fun now?" demanded Gordon. "There, you sighed
again. Are you really worried about that money?""It bothers me," answered Gordon, shaking his head from side to
side."How funny. Well, how are you going to pay it?""I don't know. I'll find a way. I have several schemes in my
head. I had thought of resigning.""Gordon! You don't mean it? Why, I wouldn't have you for
anything. Let's economize.""You mouse! You don't know what economy means!""Yes, I do. I'll go without things.""You'll go without a veil for yourself and buy something for me
that costs ten dollars," said Gordon, pinching her cheek."Oh, you don't want me to economize on you?""I don't want you to economize on anything," sighed Gordon. "I wish
I had a million for you.""I don't want it," declared Alice. "I only want enough so that you
won't worry.""I have thought of applying for the professorship of Military
Science in Colby University. How would you like that?""Oh, I would love it. And I am sure you would get it.""What faith you have in me, Alice.""Because I know you," she insisted. "But wouldn't it be some time
before you could get it?""Yes, a year, at least.""And you would worry all that time?""Well, I shall not be quite comfortable until I pay what I
owe.""Gordon, dear, won't you please, please let me get the money for
you?""Alice, if you knew some--just a few of the things your mother has said to me, you would know how
impossible it would be for me to accept the smallest favor from her
unless you were suffering.""Oh, dearest, I did not know! Please forgive me. Mow good of you
never to tell me before. My poor boy. Well, we are not suffering, and we will starve before we will
ask them for anything. Poor Gordon! You have borne so much for
me.""I'd bear a good deal more for such an angel as you are. Never
mind, dear. I've never had money. I shouldn't know what to do with
it. But I've got you and you've got me, and as long as God lets us
have each other, we will be happy. Don't fret now. There goes
'tattoo.' Be at the window for me when I come back."XVTHE FORK IN THE ROADDURING the first years of their married life letters came regularly
from Mrs. Copeland imploring Alice to come home and smooth her
mother's path to the grave. She knew that she had not long to live,
she wrote, and would Gordon have the heart to separate them? Of course
Gordon would not, so they both went down to Stockbridge, but
Mrs. Copeland showed no signs of dying, and Alice so soon settled down
into the little mouse she was before she was married, that Gordon
promptly took her back to Fort Hamilton.Three times were they summoned for this purpose and three times did
Gordon quietly take her home with him, undergoing in perfect silence
Mrs. Copeland's biting comments on his course of action. Only once he
left her there, and when he came again, it was to see Alice and her
little son--no longer the Alice he had known, but an Alice who had
begun to take a hold upon the deep things of life.Mrs. Copeland insisted that the baby was delicate from the first;
and, in spite of Gordon's stout denials, Alice looked so frightened
when her mother came into the room and pulled the curtains down and
looked at the baby and shook her head, that although Alice had meant
to stay in Stockbridge for a while, she was obliged to admit that
Gordon was right when he insisted that she must come home with him at
once."But I am so afraid something will happen to the baby without some
one who knows more about children than I do," pleaded Alice. "Can't we
have your mother to live with us?""Write and ask her," said Gordon, laughing, "and see what she
says."So Alice wrote a beautiful letter, in her neat, little round hand,
and Mrs. Counselman wrote back that she would hold herself in
readiness to come at an hour's notice, but that no house was large
enough for two families."What did I tell you?" cried Gordon. "She knows.""I suppose she is right," sighed Alice. "Every time I see her I
know why you are so good, and when I see your father I know why you
are so clever.""I am deeply thankful that it can be explained by heredity, and
that, unlike Topsy, I have not 'just growed.'" laughed Gordon."I hope Lloyd will be like you," said Alice, fondly. "Mrs. Fisher
says he looks just like you.""Oh, I hope not ! I hope I don't look like that, Alice. I'm not
conceited, but you know I am better looking than the baby.""Now, Gordon, you can make fun of yourself, if you like, and you
can make fun of me, but you shall not ridicule this precious
child. Aren't you ashamed of yourself?""Yes, I am.""Just look at him; he actually cries for you when you go
away. Isn't he pretty?""Beautiful.""And doesn't he look like you?""Exactly. If you put my clothes on him, you couldn't tell us
apart."Alice gave up in despair. Mrs. Fisher comforted her."All men talk that way, my dear. Wait until the baby is older, and
then see what Gordon will say.""Why, he is just in fun," cried Alice, indignantly. "He fairly
adores him when we are alone. He likes to tease me, that's all."No harm befell the child during his first year, in spite of Alice's
constant worry. Gordon kept her away from Stockbridge, and gradually
she came to believe that the healthful, merry little fellow, who really was like Gordon, would
live, if they would simply allow him to breathe and sleep and kick in
his own sturdy little fashion.So the summer wore away and their third winter came. The
changelessness of army life suited Alice perfectly, but its inertia
preyed upon Gordon.One day, when Alice stood at the window watching for his return,
she saw him wave his cap at her from a group of officers standing in
front of the Mess, with their arms on each other's shoulders and their
heads together in a bunch, talking excitedly over something. They
dispersed twice, and twice came together again, talking, talking, and
gesticulating."What can it be?" thought Alice, wonderingly. "News from the War
Department, I suppose. But why doesn't Gordon come and tell me?"He broke away from them at last, gave his cap a jerk over his eyes,
buttoned the bottom frog of his long overcoat, held the top together,
and came up the steps at one jump."Great news, Alice!" he cried as he opened the door and caught her
off her feet."Oh, what is it, Gordon?""Regiment is ordered away. We are going to move!""Oh," said Alice, her face falling."Oh, what a disappointed tone! Why, it will be jolly. You don't know what fun it is to
move. It gives a fellow something to do.""I should think it would," said Alice, ruefully."Our company is ordered to Fort Jefferson--Dry Tortugas.""Where is that?" asked Alice, with all a woman's charming ignorance
of geography."One of the Florida Keys--off the southern coast of Florida.""South? Florida? Oh, how lovely! I've never been South, and I've
always been crazy to go. Why, to be ordered to Florida in winter is to
have the government treat us like millionaires.""Won't it be fun? We can wear thin clothes all winter, and in the
summer you will have to come North.""Well, I'll come home and visit, and you will spend your leave with
us and that will break the summer for me. Then just as soon as it gets
cool in Stockbridge we will follow you to Fort Jefferson.""My goodness, how we shall want to see each other by that time,
when I want to tear down to Stockbridge the day after I let you go,"
sighed Gordon."Florida will be good for the baby," said Alice, wisely. "Cold
weather doesn't agree with him very well.""Florida will be good for the bamboo furniture," said Gordon. "It
won't be necessary to have it padded and steam-heated the way we do
here.""And the hammocks!" laughed Alice. " How considerate Uncle Sam has
been of the Counselmans' furniture!""We can live in hammocks the year round," said Gordon. Then he
began to sing:"From the land of sun and flowers,From Tampa's lovely shore,There comes a wail of sadness up:O'Brien is no more.The prince of all good fellows,Ne'er a better do we know,May we meet him in that happy landWith Benny Havens, O:!"He insisted upon beginning to pack that night, and by morning the
whole post was upset. Alice was not used to such topsy-turvy haste,
and at first it shocked her sense of the proprieties. But the other
officers' wives were equally expeditious, and so plainly made it
appear the only thing to do that Alice sensibly joined in, and soon
was packing as crazily as the rest. Gordon was so big and strong and
helpful, and made so merry over the hard work, that Alice spent most
of her time laughing and following him around, holding the
baby.The Counselmans were ready first, of course. Gordon had rushed
around to such an extent, and they were young, and had so little to
pack, that long before marching orders came he found time hanging
heavily on his hands. So he fell to helping the ladies of the post to
do their part of packing bric-a-brac and clocks.He did it so deftly and made such light work of it that the
officers declared that Counselman spoiled their wives by too much
waiting on them. But Gordon never could bear to see a woman do
anything which looked hard. He had such a merry way of taking her work
out of her hands, however, that they never realized how much he helped
everybody."Oh, dear, why will people give us onyx clocks and bronze vases,
when the government only allows us seven hundred pounds of luggage!"
sighed Mrs. Fisher."Never mind. Pay the extra freight with a smiling countenance. You
won't have so much next time. Three moves are equal to a fire, you
know," said Gordon, soothingly."Isn't he consoling?" cried Mrs. Fisher.Gordon insisted upon being paid by Welsh rare-bits made in the
chafing-dish and eaten from tin plates, with everybody sitting around
on boxes, and of winding up every evening with a "sing." Some-times voices broke and lips quivered
over the dear old songs which, perhaps, they might never sing together
again."I should be jealous of you, Counselman," said Major Prescott, who
never did anything he could help doing, "if you took advantage of
one-half my wife says of you.""Your wife, Major, is one of the most charitably disposed women I
know. She covers my shortcomings with that which 'never faileth.'""You think she 'suffereth long and is kind,' do you?" laughed the
major."I think she is using me as an example to make you work," answered
Gordon, confidentially.The Third was to be very generally scattered along the coast. The
officers were pleased at the prospect of a change which promised to be
so pleasant, but Gordon Counselman, the youngest first lieutenant in
the regiment, and the one assigned to the most unpromising post, was
so much more pleased than all the others that he infected the rest
with his spirits, and made the last days of the Third's stay at Fort
Hamilton a jubilee that no one who participated ever forgot.The discontented and the fretful and the chronic complainers were
the ones he took especial pleasure in diverting, and the result was
that, for so radical a move,
it was the most harmonious the regiment ever experienced.Those ordered to Pensacola and Tortugas, he claimed, were the most
favored. He painted Florida in glowing colors, and insisted that "Fort
San Carlos de Barrancas," the name of the fort at Pensacola, sounded
so Spanish and so Mexican and so foreign that to go there would be
like a composite journey around the world, with Uncle Sam for a letter
of credit.He sent Alice and the baby down to Stockbridge on Friday, and he
was to spend Sunday with them to say good-bye, bringing them back with
him to sail on Monday."Your mother will say that you are looking pale, Alice," said
Gordon, anxiously, bracing her to resist the mental malaria of her
mother, "but you must tell her that the post surgeon says Florida will
set you up and be the best thing in the world for you. And as to
Lloyd, a warm climate is exactly what he needs. Now, don't forget
this.""I won't, dear. I will remember everything. Button up your
coat. You will catch your death cold with it flying open that
way."Gordon obediently buttoned it. He thought it charming to be looked
after in this way by his pretty little wife."Now let the nurse hold the baby. You needn't be afraid people will
think it is hers.""Gordon!""Well, you are apt to overtax yourself, and I must take care of
you. You are looking a little pale.""Why, Gordon, you are just like mother," said Alice,
innocently. She never saw her mother with other people's eyes."Heaven forbid!" thought Gordon. But he did not say so.They watched each other out of sight, as if they never expected to
meet again. Nor did they suspect that any one noticed them or thought
them either odd or foolish. But one or two women who had outlived the
expression of their husband's love felt a queer little lump rise in
their throats as they turned away.When Gordon arrived in Stockbridge and tried to spring up the
terrace steps as he did at home, he felt his feet drag in the old,
unmistakable way. Although he never showed it, he disliked the house,
the grounds, the whole place as only a proud man can where he has been
insulted by a woman in scrupulously polite tones.He found Mrs. Copeland in a pious state of resignation, and Alice
with a face whiter than the baby's dress."What is the matter, dearest?" he said, taking her into his
arms. "What are they tormenting you about now?""Mother says she is too delicate to be left alone, and that she
will die if I go to Fort Jefferson. Oh, Gordon, Gordon, it will break
my heart to be left behind.""You shall not be left! I won't leave you! You are my wife more
than you are your mother's daughter, and you shall go where you want
to go.""Oh, that would be with you, darling. But I really think I ought to
stay. You can see for yourself that mother is failing.""No, I cannot.""Well, she is, and she needs me.""Let George's wife take care of her. She is here all the time.""Yes, but mother wants me, and she says my first duty is to her for
the little time she will be on earth. If I went and she should die, I
never could forgive myself.""She won't die," said Gordon, gloomily."Poor mother. She is such a sufferer," sighed Alice. "I know that I
ought to stay.""Alice, do you really feel it your duty to stay?""She thinks it is.""Well, use your own conscience. What do you think?""I think I ought to go with you.""Then you shall go."Alice clung to him in silence, with her face buried in his coat,
glad to have him decide for her, and take the responsibility off her
hands.But it was a cheerless day. Alice stayed up-stairs with her mother
in a darkened room; the doctor was called in, and Gordon and Judge
Copeland smoked in the library and talked fitfully of everything
except that which lay uppermost in both minds.The Overshines came over in the afternoon to say good-bye, but they
hurried away again from a house filled with such careful gloom.When the doctor left, Gordon went to get Alice and take her for a
walk."Gordon," she said, when she saw him, "It is no use. I must stay
here. The doctor says Florida might kill my baby.""The post surgeon thinks differently.""Yes, but mother says Dr. Jamison knows my constitution, and the
baby's, and that I will be running the gravest risk if I take him. I
have decided. I must stay here."Gordon said nothing. He was too bitterly disappointed to speak. He
only took her in his arms, and kissed her and petted her all the rest
of the time they were together, in a way which afterwards came back to her, as if, even
then, he must have known.If he felt that Alice was wrong he never said so, and she could not
seem to feel intuitively that she had failed at the supreme test. Men
like Gordon are braver than the Alices of this world ever know. She
thought it perfectly natural that he should hover around her in an
agony of love and tenderness, but which was largely
disappointment--not in her; he was too loyal for that. But a great
bitterness of spirit surged up and overwhelmed him at the cruelty of
the unknown elements in her nature which made it impossible for her to
meet him on his plane. Gordon was undergoing the mortal agony of a
soul sick, sick unto death, and without the power of speech which
might lead to healing.Alice was sharing his unhappiness to the best of her ability. One
has no fault to find with the purling river which runs into the mighty
sea. Doubtless the river would feel more natural in finding its outlet
in a lake.She clung to him at parting with such soft, womanly tenderness that
Gordon forgot some of the deep-searching pain he had undergone. But
his face, which always was so merry, took on such a look of anguish
when he held his baby son in his arms for the last time that judge
Copeland turned hastily away.Gordon tried to go twice, and twice came back again, to undergo
once more the sweet bitterness of pressing his face against the soft
baby cheeks of the little fellow, who tried to understand what Alice
was saying to him about dear papa's going away.Gordon looked back from the gate, and Alice was at the window
waving Lloyd's baby hand for him. Gordon was not ashamed of the tears
which forced themselves to his eyes at the sudden mighty ache of his
heart.XVIINTO SILENCEGORDON COUNSELMAN had all a soldier's idea of duty. He followed his
own conscience, and permitted everybody else, even his wife, to do the
same. Although he could not upon this occasion quite agree with Alice
in her point of view, still he defended her against every one who
blamed her for not going with her husband, as many people dared to
do. He admired Alice's devotion to a forbidding duty, which she paid
so unswervingly. He doubted if, in her place, he could have done it so
promptly. A man with a conscience will sacrifice his head and his
bodily comfort to his ideal of duty, but he clings tenaciously to his
heart's desire, and yields that last, if at all. A woman with a
conscience often makes a burnt-offering of her heart, from pure
altruism. Men call such a woman either a saint, or--cold.To Alice's grief, she discovered that nearly everybody in
Stockbridge, and, later, that even Miss
Vandevoort herself, thought her entirely wrong in her course of
action. Some gave her no quarter. The kindest only said that her
conception of duty was ill considered. Her letters to Gordon's mother,
hitherto so affectionate, became constrained and apologetic; and
Mrs. Counselman's silence upon this one subject in her kind replies
grieved Alice beyond measure--it was so eloquent a condemnation.It was part of Alice's inheritance, that in spite of all this she
never thought of changing her mind and following Gordon to Fort
Jefferson.When it became too much to bear, she overflowed in her letters to
Gordon, and he assured her that no one was competent to judge so well
as her dear self, and he upheld her so courageously that she believed
he wholly approved her course--so much so that she began to think, and
to say to others, that in remaining in Stockbridge she was following
her husband's advice.When Kate, at Nice, received the first letter from Alice, in which
she put this into words, it did not change her opinion in the
slightest degree. She knew just how Alice came to believe that. She
dropped the letter in her lap and sat looking out over the blue waters
of the Mediterranean as if her eyes saw something from the long
ago.Little Lloyd was growing finely. He was one person to whom Alice could talk of Gordon by the
hour. She tried to make him an entity to the child. She filled her
rooms with pictures of him, and made him the hero of all the wonderful
tales she wove for the sleepy hour. She read his letters aloud to the
little fellow, who listened with grave, intelligent eyes, and guided
the baby fist in the hieroglyphics which went as replies from Lloyd to
his papa. Alice even sent Gordon the photograph of himself, taken in
his uniform, which Lloyd considered his. It was all blistered from the
moisty kisses his little son had imprinted on the face in his bursts
of affection for his soldier father, and Gordon laughed, with tears in
his eyes, when he saw it.Perhaps they were very foolish, these two young people. But they
loved each other, and they went blindly forward, hoping for the
future, the dear future which would bring them together.The winter passed, spring came and went, and summer was half
over. It was time for Gordon to have his leave. Alice was growing
restlessly impatient. It was very hot in Florida, and had been summer
with them when there was snow in Stockbridge.Suddenly a letter came which almost repaid Alice for her year of
separation. The long-looked-for detail as professor of Military
Science at Colby University had arrived, and with it Gordon's
leave of absence. That meant no more
separations, no more debts, no more worry, and Gordon with her for at
least four years. Alice almost ran to tell the good news to her
friends. Gordon had saved it to surprise her. She talked to Lloyd
until the child was nearly crazy with delight. Gordon's letter said
that he might arrive at any time. Letters were so often delayed coming
from Tortugas. "You may look for me at any hour," he wrote."Papa may come to-day, dear lamb," she cried to Lloyd. "Perhaps he
is here now. Perhaps he is just getting off the train. Perhaps he is
coming down the street. Let's look out of the window and see if we can
see him. How big is he, darling?""Bigger dan g'an'papa," said the child."And what does he call my baby?""Papa's p'ecious little son.""And what does my baby call him?""My darlin' foddy.""And what are you going to do when you see him?""I'm don' tiss 'm, 'n' hug him much as I love him.""Oh, you little angel! You remember it all. Now, you won't forget
when you see a great big man, and I say, 'That's your foddy,' will
you?""No," said the child, solemnly."Come, let's sit at the window and watch for him. His letter said, 'At any hour.' here, sit
in mamma's lap, and let me brush your curls. Do you remember how we
sent one of these curls to dear foddy, and he put it in the back of
his watch, and a little hair got into the wheels and stopped them?
Wasn't that funny? Oh, look! There comes a messenger boy with a
telegram. Perhaps that is from papa, saying that he has arrived in New
York. Let mother run to get it."She opened the telegram without a fear. It was from the post
surgeon at Fort Jefferson."Mrs. GORDON COUNSELMAN, Stockbridge,
Pa.:"Lieutenant Counselman died of yellow-fever on the 11th inst., at
5.30 P.M.G. H. CARSON,"Post
Surgeon."Alice fell just where she stood, like a broken lily. It was her
father who found her, and with unspeakable tenderness carried her to
her bed, where she lay crushed and helpless.The blow had fallen so suddenly and with such mighty force that for
weeks she remained in a dazed, semi-conscious condition, shedding no
tears and making no outcry.The doctor shook his head when day after day passed with no
change. But nothing aroused her stunned intellect, nothing brought the
healing tears, not even the presence and pitiful wailing of her boy, who could not understand why his
caresses were unnoticed and unreturned.When she grew strong enough to creep out into the light of day a
letter came from Dr. Magnus, of Key West, who had gone to Gordon's
assistance when the pestilence broke out at the fort.She was sitting listlessly at the window, with her boy in her arms,
when this letter was put into her hands to read:"Mrs. GORDON
COUNSELMAN:"My dear Madam,--My telegram in answer to
your inquiry concerning Lieutenant Counselman doubtless has been
received. Some further particulars I now give by mail. During the
violence of the epidemic at Fort Jefferson I volunteered my services
to assist the medical officers at that post in the care of the sick."Upon my arrival I found the officers at the post, including
Lieutenant Counselman, wellnigh exhausted with incessant watching and
assiduous care of the victims. During my stay of some ten days no one
displayed a more exalted sympathy, more zeal and anxiety in the care
of the sufferers, day and night, than your husband, entirely
forgetting and ignoring self in the discharge of self-imposed duties
to those committed to his official care. The leave of the colonel of
the regiment had expired some few days before, and Lieutenant
Counselman's date for departure was therefore delayed. But although
repeatedly urged to go, the nurses were too few for him to permit
himself to listen to their generous suggestions. I remained with him
until the epidemic began to abate, when I returned to Key
West."Two hours after my departure from the fort, on the 8th inst., he
was violently stricken down, and although a gun was fired and the flag
displayed at half-mast, the vessel upon which I left was too far out
for the gun to be heard or the signal of distress to be seen. He died
after three days' illness, truly, sincerely, and deeply regretted by
friends, acquaintances, and unusually so by his comrades."During the epidemic it had been the custom for the colored
attachés of the post to bury the dead. But during the still
hours of the night, after his death in the late afternoon, those of
the soldiers who had volunteered their services as nurses and
attendants, desirous of paying the last sad tribute to their beloved
commander, whose last words were, 'I have stood by you,' secretly
removed his remains, and buried him silently and tearfully, with their
own hands, on an adjoining key some two miles distant."The surprise of the officers the next morning was great, but
appreciating this portrayal of affection on the part of his soldiers,
they were silent as to the breach of discipline, and proceeded with
the plan of interment."They were rowed over to the key, and with appropriate services
committed his body, dust to dust and ashes to ashes, and his soul to
God who gave it."The loss of such men as Lieutenant Counselman is truly great, to
home, country, and friends, and is a forcible example of
self-sacrifice in devotion to duty."Hoping that this sad affliction to you and friends at home may be
somewhat softened by your knowledge of the circumstances under which
he was taken,"I am, my dear madam, "Very truly
yours,"JOSEPH
MAGNUS."When Alice finished she buried her face in her baby's little white
dress, and fell into the bitter, bitter weeping which only the widowed
know.Then she took Lloyd in her arms and went and stood before a large
portrait of Gordon. The baby looked wonderingly at her tears."Look there, my darling. There is a hero that nobody ever will hear
about. Only you and mamma know that he gave up his life for other
people, and that we are proud, proud that we belong to him and bear
his name."She took the letter down for her mother to read. Mrs. Copeland had
been prostrated ever since the news arrived. Alice sat down by the
window overlooking the Delaware and the boat-house steps where Gordon
had first told her he loved her. She still held Lloyd in her arms.Mrs. Copeland sobbed aloud over the reading of it, but Alice only
rocked the baby back and forth, and looked out over the river."He was a hero, mother." she said, quietly. "Pray do not exhaust
yourself so. I only wish that people knew how good he was. But they
would forget, if they did know. You and I, Lloyd, will never
forget. We will always remember him, won't we, baby?""Papa's p'ecious little son," murmured the child, sleepily.Alice kissed him and smiled."Is my foddy tummin' to-day?" he asked."Not to-day, darling. Perhaps to-morrow.""My foddy's tummin' to-morrow," he repeated, leaning his curly head
against Alice's shoulder in sleepy content.Judge Copeland came in and laid his hand tenderly on Alice's soft
hair. It was so exactly Gordon's way and Gordon's touch, that she
bowed over her baby's head in helpless sobbing."Are you able to read this, dear daughter?" he said. He handed her
a newspaper, pointing with his finger to a column headed, "LIEUTENANT
GORDON COUNSELMAN."Alice took it and read:"Lieutenant Counselman, who died recently at Fort Jefferson,
Fla., has left a name among his comrades and in his regiment which any
soldier might be proud to own. He was ordered to a Northern post,
detailed as professor of Military Science at Colby University. His
successor had arrived at Fort Jefferson with his detail, but his
command needed him. The dreadful epidemic of yellow-fever was taking
off his men. He refused to go; even refused to look at the order for
his detail, preferring death at his post to an 'easy berth,' even
though that death was facing him in the awful form of pestilence. He
chose to remain with his command, and in the words of Colonel Collins,
his successor in command, 'stood by while the dead were being carried
out, and now lies with ten of the men he tried so hard to
save.'"Subjoined is an order issued by the Gulf Department, an honor
rarely paid to a subaltern officer:"'HEADQUARTERS DEPARTMENT OF THE GULF,"'HOLLY SPRINGS,
MISSISSIPPI."'General Orders, No. 27."'It is with sincere regret that the Department Commander announces
the death at Fort Jefferson, Florida, of First Lieutenant Gordon
Counselman of the Third Artillery."'This young officer had already won the esteem of his associates
and the respect of his commanding officers by his high soldierly
qualities, and the circumstances attending his death were such as to
furnish a fitting close to his military career."'The only officer at an isolated military post when it was visited
by a dangerous epidemic, he seemed to multiply himself in his
ever-present care and watchfulness for the men of his command, and it
is doubtless due to the exhaustion and fatigue resulting from his
anxious discharge of duty that he finally fell a victim to the
disease."'With death on every side and staring him in the face he never
faltered in his lonely duty, and when relief finally came he could
only welcome it for his men. It came too late to save their faithful
commander. Then, and not till then, he yielded to the attack of the
destroyer, and on Thursday evening, the 11th of September, died, on
duty and at his post."'By order of MAJOR-GENERAL CLARKE.
"'E. R. Carpenter, Ass't. Adjt.-General.'"Alice handed the paper back to her father."It is cruel that you could not know these things first, daughter,"
he said, kindly."No, father. It is just as well. I am glad other people know them, too. But they will
forget. Only I shall remember."But when hosts of letters poured in upon her from Gordon's brother
officers and from his countless friends, Alice began to realize, as
she never had done before, how he had lived and how he had died. Even
she, his own wife, had not known him as these people seemed to have
done. For the first time she was getting an outside point of view.All through the autumn Alice comforted her mother for Gordon's
loss. Mrs. Copeland was more bereaved than any one would have
suspected. Perhaps she regretted some things. Most people never feel
remorse until it is too late.Gifford hung around Alice with his face grave with sorrow. He
filled her room with flowers, and showed her in a thousand ways how
his boyish heart ached for her. Everybody said Alice bore up
bravely. They never knew how many nights she spent kneeling beside her
baby's little bed, her whole soul going up in the anguished cry, "Dear
God, why must Thou always take the best?"Who knows the night-time agony of those who "bear up bravely?"Alice controlled herself for her mother's sake. Mrs. Copeland could
not bear the sight of any grief except her own. Elsie, too, was easily
upset.Kate Vandevoort heard of it in Norway and came directly home. But it was November before she
arrived."How will she bear it!" thought Kate. "If I could only see whether
she will live by Gordon's life or Mrs. Copeland's."Kate found Alice a pathetic little black-robed figure sitting
beside her mother, both of them engrossed in fancy work. As Kate took
Alice in her arms, the ball of worsted rolled under the table and the
kitten played with it."My poor child," she murmured.Little Lloyd crept up to Alice, and, pulling at her skirts, said:"Is my darlin' foddy tummin' home to-day?"Kate broke into wild weeping."Not to-day, dear. Perhaps to-morrow."THE END