A Guided Tour of the EWWRP Women's Genre Fiction ProjectLillian E. Craton2005Genre FictionAs American and English culture gradually shifted attention from
the corseted Angel in the House to the sexualized New Woman, popular
fiction both documented and propelled a transformation of the imagery
used to understand femininity. The works of this collection provide a
window on cultural change during a period that brought women new legal
rights and an ever-shifting set of ideological, technological, and
vocational challenges. The project focuses on the years 1860-1920,
though we have included a handful of novels from the preceding and
following decades. These exceptions are texts that we feel offer
useful expansion or contrast for themes central to the project's
fiction. Our bookends, for instance, are two novels by the same
name. Grace Aguilar's A Mother's
Recompense (first published in 1850 but reprinted throughout
the century) remains a classic of domestic fiction. In the preface to
Edith Wharton's 1925 A Mother's
Recompense, Wharton apologizes to Aguilar for appropriating
the title for a novel about sexuality and mother-daughter
alienation. The project's other works offer a remarkable array of
female characters, from the ever-weeping Elsie Dinsmore of Martha
Finley's sentimental novels, to the cross-dressing Amazon Leona
Lacoste of Florence Marryat's Her
Father's Name, and an equally broad range of perspectives on
love, sex, and work. If we can draw one conclusion from the novel's
texts, it is the inadequacy of any simple definition of womanhood to
account for the variety of images and experience we find in women's
fiction.Genre fiction by women offers a reflection of popular culture that
extends beyond consideration of gender. Popular fiction documents both
the frustrations of rapid social change and innovations of rapid
technological expansion. Edith Barnett's Dr. and Mrs. Gold
considers the anarchist movement, for example, while Ann
S. Stephens and Metta
Victoria Fuller Victor examine the opening of the American
frontier. Lawrence Lynch's Under
Fate's Wheel and C.N. and A.N. Williamson's The Princess Passes respectively
consider the impact of the introduction of the bicycle and automobile
on social life. The project offers a range of perspectives on American
racial tension-from C. H Brown's Mammy, to Edith Davis's
reformist Major Brown, or Whether White or Black a Man, to
Hallie Rives's pro-lynching novel Smoking Flax. British texts span a
range of perspectives on class and empire, from B. M. Croker's Indian
romances to Olive Schreiner's scathing denouncement of colonial abuses
in Trooper Peter Halket. Writers on both sides of the Atlantic
consider the significance of interracial marriage--Maud Diver, Onoto
Watanna, and Payne Erskine offer interesting examples. Browse our
subject headings for a sampling of the cultural themes that recur in
the project's fiction, or use the full-text search feature to track
specific concepts within the collection. The subject heading "Mormonism,"
for instance, guides you to works that center on Mormon characters or
history, while searching the word "Mormon" will unearth every use of
the term throughout the full text of the project's fiction.Literary researchers will find the project a useful tool for the
study of genre formation-in addition to mysteries and romances, we
include domestic fiction, sensation fiction, adventure stories, New
Woman novels, ghost stories, social problem novels, military fiction,
regional realism, young-adult novels, travel fiction, and more. The
breadth of the project allows readers to trace the development and
overlap of different genres-John Strange Winter/Henrietta Stannard's
Garrison Gossip blends
military and domestic themes, for instance, while Margaret Deland's
The Rising Tide marries female
activism to romance. You will find examples that conform to generic
conventions, as well as those that defy categorization. In some cases,
our texts offer a resource for the study of more canonical works-Lady
Georgiana Chatterton's Compensation, for instance, is one
the of the silly novels mentioned by title in George Eliot's famous
essay "Silly Novels by Lady Novelists." The project also houses works
by the kinswomen of male authors who have received greater critical
attention. Anna Thackeray is the daughter of Vanity Fair's
W. M. Thackeray, Mrs. Belloc
Lowndes is sister to Hilaire Belloc, and Frances Eleanor Trollope
is the wife of Anthony Trollope (and daughter-in-law to authoress
Frances Milton Trollope). You will also find under-analyzed aesthetic
treasures here-- the proofreader of Alice Brown's novels, for example,
came to feel that these texts deserve a major place in the study of
modernism.This site makes no pretense of a comprehensive perspective on genre
fiction-we selected our texts within the limits of Emory's Woodruff
Library collection and our own practical necessities. We chose both
works that seemed characteristic of a particular genre or publishing
practice, like our Bertha
Clay dime romances, and works that seemed relevant to research
questions in the field. In some cases, we duplicate novels already
available online thanks to the tireless effort of Project Gutenberg and other
digital texts projects, but we believe that our searchable,
research-quality texts offer a useful supplement for scholars. As you
browse the collection, you will find that some authors appear under
their maiden names, others under married names, and still others under
pseudonyms-- we attempt to identify authors by the name scholars are
most likely to associate with their works, even when that name is
simply "Rita" or
"The
Duchess." Though the inconsistency may seem confusing, it reflects
the challenges the project encountered in researching the period's
publishing practices. Some authors established their reputations under
multiple identities, like Annie Swan/David Lyall. Others adopted
elaborate authorial personae like Marietta Holley's "Josiah
Allen's Wife," Henrietta Stannard's "John Strange
Winter," and Canadian-Chinese author Edith Winifred Owen's
Japanese persona "Onoto Watanna." 
Multiple authors also published under house names like "Bertha Clay,"
a pen name originally adopted by Charlotte Brame for the American
publications of her work, but later used by Street & Street for
a series of romance novels by a variety of authors. Please explore the
site and enjoy the remarkable works of fiction collected here.