 Front Cover of Lawrence Lynch's "A Woman's Tragedy"A WOMAN'S TRAGEDY Illustration at front of Lawrence Lynch's "A Woman's Tragedy""She walked away without a glance at the spot Mike had reined up the his colt."  (Page 81.)A WOMAN'S TRAGEDYOR, THE DETECTIVE'S TASK
A thrilling narrative BYLAWRENCE L.LYNCH(E. MURDOCH VAN DEVENTER)
Author of "Under Fate's Wheel," "High Stakes," "The Unseen Hand,"
"The Last Stroke," "Shadowed by Three," etc. etc. LONDON WARD, LOCK & CO., LIMITED, WARWICK HOUSE, SALISBURY SQUARE, E.C. List of contents at front of Lawrence Lynch's "A Woman's Tragedy" List of contents at front of Lawrence Lynch's "A Woman's Tragedy"A WOMAN'S TRAGEDY
CHAPTER I
A WOMAN'S FACEIT was in the early seventies when the Blackhills and Deadwood wooed adventure westward, and the Union Pacific was the only railway route to the then new El Dorado to be found beyond Omaha that I first ran across my old chum, Allan Eversoll, in Santa Barbara. I was at that time working at a case connected with a band of train robbers who had more than once waylaid the eastward-bound coach when there was reason to suppose it was freighted with nuggets.Though we had not met since our college days, it was only a matter of hours before we went back to the past, to old scenes, old escapades, and old sweethearts.I was shocked at the first sight of my friend's face, it was so pale and worn, and inwardly wondered what could so break his health and spirits, for his melancholy was as marked as his pallor, and in the old days Allan Eversoll had been called the gayest, the most recklessly daring spirit of his set.It was a chance remark that drew his story from him." Upon my word, Allan," I said, " seeing you has 7brought up a host of memories ! The old larks, the old games, the old sweethearts. You were counted the most fastidious and the most fickle of all our young Romeos then. Have you been as difficult and as fickle ever since ? " and I laughed. " Great Scott, man! I have not yet asked if you are married ! "At my words his face grew paler, and he quivered convulsively. I tried to speak soothingly." Allan, old man," I said, " you're not strong, and my sudden appearance has unsettled you. I have made you talk too much--too long, perhaps--already."He laughed bitterly. " It's all the other way," he replied, " and I feel like trying if opening my mind to a friend won't ease it just for a little while--that is, if my troubles won't bore you, for it's trouble and not disease that has put me in this state!"And now I knew that he wanted to talk. " If it is trouble, Al, and if my sympathy, or my help, is of any worth to you, it is yours, you know that! "I know something about what you can do, old friend, by what you have done. I have read of some of your exploits in the papers. You've developed, by all accounts, a mighty talent for seeing into things ; but unless you can raise the dead, Carl, you can't help me!"For a moment I gazed at him in silence, then bending toward him, I said : " Tell me about it, Al. What has happened in these past two years to change you so? "He handed me from an inner pocket an oblong case with round, metal-bound corners, and holding it toward me, said, with face half averted" That is what changed me, Carl. A woman's face ! "I touched the spring and the case fell open in my hand. Then, for a moment, I gazed and was silent.The case contained the profile picture of a brunette, the features classic in their regularity, but by no means cold. There was strength and spirit in the poise of the head, and rippling hair, dark and abundant, seemed to emphasise the beauty of the proud face.I held the picture so long that my friend turned toward me at last in mute inquiry, and then I slowly closed the case. " She is very beautiful," I said, as I gave it back to him, but I asked no question, and we sat in silence looking out over the water, until at last he said, in a half whisper" She was my wife."Was?" The word slipped from me unwillingly. Was ! " he said hollowly, " or is! I'd give my life to know--which ! "CHAPTER II
HIS TRAGEDYI CANNOT repeat Eversoll's broken, pathetic story as he told it me; but briefly it was thisA month after our last meeting, Eversoll, having inherited a fine estate, went with his then invalid sister to spend a month or so at a quiet mountain health resort.It was here that he had met his wife, and the attraction must have been mutual and strong. She was, like himself, an orphan, and was chaperoned by a rich and haughty aunt, who at first discouraged his advances, and only unbent when she learned that he was " of the Philadelphia Eversolls," and the heir of " old Jerry Eversoll," the keenest broker and financier of his day.Allan was an ardent wooer, and when he learned that the aunt was about to go abroad for the winter, he begged for a hasty marriage and gained his way. They were married at the end of the season and went abroad, a party of four.And here occurred the first mistake. They should have gone alone, or not at all, instead of which Eversoll's sister and the haughty aunt accompanied them.This latter lady was a born dictator, and Allan soon found that instead of giving up her sovereignty over his bride, she assumed an authority over himself as well, and this, from being at first amusing to him,became annoying, and finally culminated, when the lady returned to their hotel one day while they were in Paris, and going at once to her own apartment, sent for her niece. What happened there he did not know for some time, but at the end of half an hour his wife came to him with flushed cheeks and sparkling, angry eyes, and bade him seek for another hotel at once, or better still, to take her back to London, for she would not remain under the same roof with Aunt Miranda another day." She has insulted me," the girl cried, " so shamefully that it has cancelled any debt of gratitude I felt that I owed her, and I never wish to see her again ! " And this was all she would say. His sister was quite willing to humour her young sister-in-law, and to uphold her in her sudden rebellion.So they separated, and two months later Allan, his wife, and sister returned to America.For a little while they were very happy, until one day, passing the music-room, he saw his wife standing face to face with a young woman whom he had known in his wild young bachelor days, but whose name he would not have uttered in his wife's presence.A stronger sense of personal guilt, perhaps, would have aroused in him the instinct of personal danger ; as it was, his one thought was of his wife, and his one feeling that of horror, of anger, that this bold woman had dared to enter her presence.Without pausing to ask the reason of this unwelcome intrusion, he demanded why the woman was there.And then his wife, holding up two or three open letters, asked : " Are these yours ? Look! "Then the Eversoll temper had flown to his destruction. He admitted the signature indifferently, for he

had quite forgotten the foolish compliments and sentimental quotations which they contained.Allan said, groaning heavily, " When I try to recall that scene, and to see wherein I blundered so fatally, all seems to turn into a chaos, and I to be going out of my senses ! If I showed my contempt for the miserable woman too plainly, I was punished for it! I asked my wife to leave the room; she refused, and suddenly the girl threw herself at my feet, begging, and acting a damnable part. She caught at my hand, and in wresting myself from her clutches I was too fierce, and she fell--and fainted. Then my wife commanded me to leave the room and to send her help. She would hear nothing, and seeing her distress, I went." After an hour, an eternity it seemed to me, a servant brought me a note from my wife. She could not see me yet ; she wanted to think, and if I wished to please her I would leave her alone in her room until evening. Again I waited an eternity, and at evening there was another written message. ` She is going to the hospital,' it said, `and I must go also, for she is friendless, and I must know the worst before we meet again. Go to your sister's in the morning; you will see or hear from me there. But don't follow me to-night.' I knew that I must obey her, and again I waited, walking my floor till morning. Then I hastened to my sister's, and there I found a letter." ' When you read this,' it said, ' you will have read your last word from me. Do not seek to find me. You know why I go, and even if the life of the woman who has come between us did not now hang in the balance, we could never come together again. If she dies I must be a witness against you, or else be far



away. I choose the latter. If she lives she will always stand between us. I have purposely given the maids at the hotel cause to think me half demented. I shall leave the same impression here. When I am missed, as of course I must be, let it be thought that I have lost my mind. Do this, I beg of you ; it is the last I shall ever ask of you.'" Allan laid his face upon his arms and groaned." I could not obey her," he said. " I searched for her everywhere, and with the best aid I could get, but it was a hopeless search."" And the motive? "" I could not guess it unaided. But my sister brought her woman's wit to bear upon the case. I told her all I knew of the woman."Tell me," I hazarded.There's little to tell. I was camping in the Vermont woods with three fellows whom I had met the year I left school. We had a team and a buckboard, for there was plenty of fine country driving. Near us at a cottage were half-a-dozen girls with a chaperone. Acquaintance was easy, and we rode and fished together, and this one fell to me by mutual consent. I did not admire her ; I did not make love to her; it was an innocent diversion on my part, I assure you, though perhaps foolish and giddy enough.""But--those letters ?"" It was a part of our fun to invite them to drive, or the like, in mock heroic blank verse, and to quote absurdly from the poets and operas. I can see now how those ridiculous scrawls must have seemed like a fool's love-letters, full as they were of veiled allusions in loftiest hyperbole, such stuff as `communion of souls,' in referring to a pedestrian match, and `many

waters cannot quench love,' in alluding to a cur belonging to the chaperone and named ` Love,' because of his ugliness."He paused and turned as a light step approached our corner." It is my sister," he said. " She has joined me out here. She's the best of sisters--my only friend, almost," and he arose and presented me, receiving in silence two or three letters, which she put into his hand while exchanging greetings." They came while you were out with your friend," she said gently, and then began to converse with me upon the first topic of the visitor from the east, the beauty of the California coast. Allan turned slowly to an open French window from which a band of light streamed across him, as he stood to read his letters by its gleam.Then, a few moments later, we heard him utter a sharp cry as of mingled surprise and gratification, and he came towards us with hands outstretched."Lettice ! Carl ! listen ! She has been seen in New York ! Johnstone is almost certain that he saw her enter an art store on Locust Street last week." And then he sank weakly into a seat, seeming overcome by the news.But his sister uttered a sharp, quickly checked exclamation, and I knew that, for some reason, the news was not pleasant to her. But she only said soothingly"Do not let it excite you too much, Al, or you won't sleep. To-morrow we'll talk it over."" Oh, I know what that means," he said. " It's my bed-time, and you want me to go ! Lettice, I have told my old friend here about my troubles, and tomorrow, if I can coax or bribe him to drop his game

here, I am going to ask him to find her for me. He can do it if any man can ! "I felt her start, and recognised the restraint in her voice, as she said" Well, I will consent to that if he will--that is, if you'll go to your room now; and if Mr. Masters will remain here a few moments, I will come back and do my best to fill your place as entertainer."" By all means," I answered lightly ; but I knew her words conveyed a request beyond the mere desire to get her brother to his room before the " restful hour" had passed.CHAPTER III
THE STORY TOLD ANEWI WAS not mistaken in my guess at her meaning, for she came back in a few moments." Mr. Masters," she began, " I am glad you have waited. I am speaking frankly to you, for I believe you are my brother's friend. You used to be, I know."" And am still, I trust," I replied."Thank you ; I was sure of it. I dread Allan's spells of brooding, and try to keep him from talking of the past."" And do you think this is best for him--this repression ? "" His physician does, though I sometimes have my doubts. But I must ask you to help me a little."" In what way? "" By using your influence with him. He has shown me that he has great confidence in your ability, and he declares that he intends to ask you to drop all else and assist him in finding his wife."And you think it a hopeless task ? "I am sure it is, Mr. Masters. What I am about to tell is not known to my brother. The events occurred while he was very ill, otherwise we could never have concealed them from him." After my sister-in-law's disappearance, wishing to leave no stone unturned, I allowed the police to print a description of the garments in which she was last

seen ; and ten weeks later, a hat, coat, and pair of gloves of the sort she always wore were found on the river-bank near Elmhurst. There was a boat-house and a copse of willows a few steps away, and small and dainty footprints led down to the water's edge. Down--but not back ! We kept the story from my brother--who was already ill--with difficulty, but when those garments were found he was too ill to notice or know. He does not know now! Take away from him the hope of finding her some day, and you snap the only thread that binds him to life. There all the doctors agree.""And the body?"" It was not found. Other bodies were taken from the water not far from that time and near the place--but not hers."She paused and sighed.What became of the--actress ? " I asked at last.Ah ! That is what I was going to tell. When Allan pushed her from him, she had struck, in falling, against a flower-stand, and injured her head somewhat seriously, and lay in the hospital for many weeks. I went there often to see her, for I was anxious on Allan's account."It was three weeks after the finding of the clothes by the river that I was allowed to talk with her. I found her a hardened woman, hating those of her sex who were better and happier than herself. She had remembered Allan, and seeing him in the street, had traced him to his hotel. Doubtless her intention was to renew his acquaintance; probably she had hoped for his aid and friendship, for she did not know when she sent her card up to him that he had a wife."She had given her card to one of the servants, and asked to see Mr. Eversoll. Whether the servant


blundered or wilfully misinterpreted the message, no one knows, save himself--he had been reported by Allan a few days before for impertinence and negligence--at any rate, he gave the card and message toMrs. Eversoll.""And what was the message ? "" The card bore the name of 'Miss Lola Montieth, Serio-Comic Artist,' and on the blank side was pencilled : 'Please let me speak with you, even if you have forgotten me quite. I have something of value to you which you should have. Lola.'"Allan's wife had the natural prejudice of her sort against the profession of the stage. But she fancied that some school acquaintance, under an assumed name, and perhaps unfortunate, had sought her out, and told the servant to admit her."Mrs. Carolyn paused and sighed." The actress had studied her part with reference to a different audience, and when she advanced, with outstretched hands and her most alluring smile, the look of kindly inquiry with which Allan's wife met her froze into haughtiness, and she said icily:I do not think that I know you--or ever did.'And I,' retorted the actress, ' do not wish to know you.'" ` Then why have you sent me this ? ' holding out the card.I didn't,' came from the other, `unless you arc my old friend Allan Eversoll--in skirts.'"This joke and the whole manner of the woman aroused my sister's pride and resentment. She drew herself up haughtily and said, ` I am Allan Eversoll's wife, and I must ask you to leave my rooms.'" This, the woman told me, let loose the devil in her, and she poured out a torrent of lies, as only such

women can. She claimed Allan for her lover, united to her by what she afterwards found was a mock marriage. He had abandoned her to want, and she had endured it in silence ; but now she would be silent no longer ; she would tell the wicked story to all the world, and Allan should choose between them. My sister was brave and loyal, but she was jealous, too. She scoffed at the woman's claims, and again ordered her to leave her rooms. But the actress had another card to play. She had brought those absurd letters, which she now produced. Doubtless it had been her thought, if blandishments proved of no avail, to produce the ambiguous screeds and levy blackmail. But now her one thought was to humiliate a proud woman who had treated her with scorn. She produced the letters, and her victim saw at a glance that it was her husband's handwriting. Prompted by jealousy, she opened one of them. It was one which contained a burlesque invitation to ` a moonlight flitting,' bidding her `refuse at the risk of driving him to the dagger or the poisoned cup.'" I suppose this was the last straw. While standing there holding this letter in her hand, her husband entered, and his first word, his first look, seemed to confirm what she had just heard and read." She was hasty--she was a too easy dupe, if you will ; but, Mr. Masters, I, a woman, can enter into her feelings of that horrible few moments. Every second in his presence, and hers, was an added humiliation ; to remain would be to break down before that awful woman. She must go ! She must not see him again ! and--she went.""And you believe she is dead ? " I inquired." Why, certainly ! how else--" she stopped, gazing at me wonderingly.How else, indeed," I assented ; and then, a little to her surprise, I questioned her concerning her brother's wife, her looks, the colour of her hair and eyes, and many other small points.Before I went to bed that night, I wrote a letter to an office of the police force in the eastern city where this tragedy had occurred. I was not quite unknown to him. This letter called for certain information regarding the man whom I was " trailing," and ended " In addition to this, will you refer to the records of June 17, 18--, and give me detailed description of any drowned or otherwise dead bodies of young women found soon after that date, with full description."The next morning I was not surprised to receive from my friend a proposition that I turn my present business over to a subordinate, and give my entire time to the search for his lost wife."If you ever were my friend, Carl," he pleaded, " you can prove it now. If she is in New York City you can find her. And something tells me that you will find her. Man, you can't think what this new hope has done for me. Yesterday I did not want to live. But to-day-if you will help me, I shall begin to fight for my life and the chance of seeing her once more. If I could see her only once, just to tell her the truth, I should not feel so utterly abased in my own eyes. Carl, it's my life I am asking at your hands! "What could I answer him? How could I promise to search for and find a dead woman? But I was not wholly unprepared for his appeal. I had given half the night to the consideration of the story, and I had made up my mind.As he held out an appealing hand to me, I took it in both my own and said" Allan, you know how gladly I would help you it


it were possible. I am your friend, and I am deeply interested in your story. Hear now what I propose. I may not be able to go east for some days, and before I go I must know all that you can tell me about your wife, her friends, her tastes, her abilities. You must let me question you, and however strange my questions may seem, you must reply fully and clearly. When I have learned all that you can tell me, and have obtained the addresses of her aunt and other friends, I will try to trace her movements from the time she left you,and I will find her--if she is in the land of the living!"" She is alive ! " he declared with conviction. " If she were dead I should know it, I feel sure."Later in the day I told Mrs. Carolyn what had passed between us." I feared it," she said sighing, " and now he will live in this hope ; and when that is shattered, it will be worse than at first. Still, there is no help for it. We must continue to deceive him, and when we can do so no longer he will die of hope deferred."" Mrs. Carolyn," I retorted, " you do not quite understand. I do not intend to deceive Allan. I doubt if I could do it. I mean, as soon as I am able to do so, to try and trace the steps of your sister-in-law from the moment when she left her husband until I find her at the river-bank, in her grave, or, if it should be possible--alive."" It cannot be possible," she said. " The search has been too thorough. She is dead!"" There is one thing more," I said. " The garments found in the river, where are they ? ""In the hands of the police. I dared not claim them because of Allan, and the chief promised to preserve them."" I am glad to hear that," I said.CHAPTER IV

A HOPELESS TASKNEXT morning my friend lost no time in begging me to give all my energy to the search for a woman who was probably lying dead at the bottom of the sea. I could not find the heart to deny him, or tell him the truth as his sister had told it to me.Looking into Allan Eversoll's face that morning, I was compelled to admit that my courage was no more equal to telling the whole truth than was his strength equal to bearing it. He was, in fact, keeping a frail hold upon life by the anchor of one faint hope, and when I took his hand that day I lied--if you choose to call it a lie--with my best grace and a calm conscience." Yes," I said cheerfully, " it is quite likely that the police have blundered in their search for your wife. That from your description of her she is not an ordinary woman. She was--is clever, talented perhaps, and you think she had only the one thousand dollars which she took away with her?"" I am sure of it. Heaven pity me ! To think that I have more than I can use, and she--oh, my God ! Carl! you must find her ! If you don't--if you fail--if I thought she never would be found--I could not live."And I again said stoutly : "Yes, I'll find her ! " but I added to myself, " alive or dead."I made him understand that I must have time, a few days at least, in which to get my substitute into the field and wash my hands of the other case, by which I simply meant that I must take a little time to shift my quarters and assume a disguise, if it became needful to go where Allan would be likely to be, for, of course, I did not intend to give up so important a case as that of the highwaymen was likely to prove.Still, I was sincere in my resolve to sift the mystery of the disappearance of my friend's wife, and learn how she died--if she were dead. And that very morning I received from headquarters an answer to my letter." Glad you have located MacIntyre," it said, " and that it will be easy, at the right time, to arrest him. But on no account do so until instructed, unless to prevent his escape. We learn that there are others there, hitherto unsuspected, who are among the ringleaders, and the game will be to take all together when some big deal is on hand. I send you the names on a separate cypher slip for safety. Report often ! You'll find them an uneasy lot."This letter for the time turned my thoughts toward MacIntyre & Co., so that I almost forgot to think about Allan Eversoll's lost wife, and went in haste to reconnoitre where I knew " Mac"' held forth after dark.It was well I did, for by spending half the night in a low gambling-house, and shadowing Mac' as he staggered out into the early morning, accompanied by a squat, elderly man, who had met him earlier as a stranger, I learnt that the pair contemplated a trip as far as Cheyenne, and possibly across the continent.It was quick work, but I saw Allan and informed

him, to his great gratification, that I was released from my watch in Santa Barbara. I bade him goodbye, and on the following evening took the train eastward, with my two friends Mac' & Co. just three seats ahead of me.Those were the days when the U. P. was the only road west of Omaha, and but one train a day came and went, east and west. The "'Frisco " train was due in Cheyenne at nine a.m. That from Omaha reached the same place on its westward journey at four o'clock p.m. Knowing this, I saw my quarry disembark at the lively little western outpost with grim satisfaction, and rode on until we reached Sydney, where I dined. In the afternoon I boarded the Omaha train, which carried me back to Cheyenne, a changed man--changed in appearance, but otherwise the same.Knowing Cheyenne quite well, I had no difficulty in rediscovering my men. I kept a close eye on Mac' & Co., and was not surprised when from the bar-room of the Lindholm House the pair went straight to Mike's, as the long, low wooden Music Hall was designated by the familiars of the place.Mac' and his friend seemed well known, and quite at their ease. They drank beer at one of the tables that filled the auditorium on the main floor; they hobnobbed with the ghost-skirted girls in the balcony and parlour, one side of which overlooked the stage, and they lounged for a short time in the gambling-room.If they had any object in stopping here it was yet to be accomplished, I felt sure. Judge my surprise, then, when I heard one of them call through a half-opened door : " Here you, coloured brother, tell that fellow downstairs that we must be called at eight o'clock to take the eastern express."Of course I followed, and so the next morning we were all three on our way eastward again, never stopping until we arrived in New York. There I found that my two gentlemen were witnesses in a case which should have been called on the day of our arrival, but which had been postponed, so that we all had two weeks, at least, to wait, while a third witness was being found.To MacIntyre the delay appeared to be a huge holiday; to his friend a bore; to myself a boon, and when I had found a man whom I could trust, and had put him at the heels of MacIntyre & Co., I turned my face toward the select family hotel in which the tragedy that had blighted the life of Allan Eversoll had occurred.I stopped over a week at the quiet hotel, but was unable to learn anything that could be of the least help to me.I called, too, on Mrs. Eversoll's aunt. She was quite sure one moment that her niece was dead, and just as sure the next minute that she was alive. It was no easy task to get at her various reasons for these two stout convictions, but by unlimited patience I wormed them out of her:"When Allan was lying at the point of death a woman's body was found in the river. This body was my niece's height and complexion, but the face could no longer be identified as hers. We buried the body in Greenwood Cemetery." My niece had too keen a sense of honour and too great a contempt for moral cowardice to commit suicide." The garments found on the body in the river were my niece's. I myself gave her the fur-trimmed jacket. " My niece was not murdered, because she would

not stoop so low as to be within reach of the criminal classes. She was above a case of jealousy, and there was enough money found on the body to exclude the possibility of robbery." She must have seen in the papers that Allan was at death's door, if she was alive at the time, and her conscience would not have allowed her to leave us all without a sign from her at least." She had that kind of pride that would rather beg on the street than sit idle." She would love to fight the battle of life alone. She would not be a teacher--no, an actress rather, or the star of an opera company."Two hours of this left me, indeed, more puzzled than ever. There seemed to be no clue to the mystery, and as the result of a sleepless night, I decided to give up the search. I had not even a photograph, as Mrs. Eversoll had always had a strong aversion against sitting for a picture. There was only an ivory miniature of hers in Allan's possession. However, I made the mental reservation that, if she was alive and I ran across her, I should know her at once, photograph or no photograph.CHAPTER V
PONY JACK'S BETWHEN I had written a long letter to Allan, I forced my mind back to the care of MacIntyre & Co., and found myself taking a sort of amused interest in the case. For the pair, while they made efforts to avoid the local officials who did not want them, let themselves fall readily into my net, and met me half-way in the matter of acquaintanceship ; so that when they found themselves free to return to their native wilds, they hailed my declared intentions to go west with gratification. I was playing the part of the sporting young man who lives by his wits, and I did not pretend to be a stranger to the West.Journeying together and listening to their talk, I became more and more interested in the vague hints, jests, and allusions which fell oftenest from the lips of " the Deacon," as MacIntyre invariably called his friend, whose exact position in relation to the gang I had not yet puzzled out.Days passed in the same company, morning, noon, and night, are apt to grow monotonous ; and on the last day out I took a seat near the rear of the car, and gave my attention, for a little while, to another group of passengers.They were four in number, and it did not need the loud talk of one of the women to tell one that they were vaudeville performers on their way to Mike Aiken's Varieties at Cheyenne.There were three women and a man, the latter tall and good-looking, in a slashy way, and with a glib and assertive tongue. Two of the women were of the usual type, shabby, showy, and quite too self-possessed. But the other puzzled me.That she was unlike the others was clear, for the hand upon the cushion-back of her head was perfectly gloved ; her garments, while rich, were simple, almost sombre; and that portion of her luggage which was gathered upon the seat beside her was in marked contrast to that of the others, which was a jumble of lumpy bundles wrapped in newspapers and tied with hempen string.The object of my interest did not unveil herself, and when she was aroused by one of her companions, she replied to a loudly-uttered question in a voice quite inaudible to one sitting a few feet away. But I noted that when she left the car at the journey's end she held aloof from the man, and walked away beside one of the girls with a lagging step, as if her own company would have been more to her taste. When, however, they became lost to my view around the corner leading to the boarding-house, I was sure that she was one of Mike's new people, and I smiled to think that I had been misled by a graceful figure and a refined toilet into fancying her the sister or wife of one of the officers at the garrison, fallen among the trash, and possibly in need of a protector.But my interest, such as it was, in the newly-arrived inmates of Aiken's boarding-house was short-lived, for MacIntyre in the eastern metropolis and MacIntyre in Cheyenne were very different people to keep an eye upon.The town was just then at the apex of its rather questionable fame, and to say that it was lively was

to draw it mild, the liveliness being found, for the most part, in those motley establishments where drinking, gaming, music and varieties were all blended under the name of " theatre."Mike Aiken's theatre was the biggest as well as the worst in the place. When the town began it had spread out until it now held under one low roof the theatre proper, with its gallery and wine-room above. It was flanked upon the outer corner by the office and bar, with a gaming-room in the rear; while upon the inner side was the cafe, with kitchens and living-rooms of a sort for the use of the working staff. The rear rooms were surrounded by a high and light board fence.Until noon the streets of this new town were mostly asleep, but after the noon or Western dinner-hour "something was always going on at Mike's," to quote his bar-tender, "till roostin'-time in the morning."Something was going on the day after my arrival, if one might judge by the shouts and guffaws from a group of men standing about the bar, each with a glass in his hand, and each holding a bright yellow poster of uncommon size and smelling of printer's ink.I was not quite a stranger to the bar-tender, and my advent caused no break in the conversation." Gee-whiz ! " ejaculated a stumpy, red-shirted man, thumping his glass upon the newly varnished pine bar. "And did she say that there ! To Mike himself?"" That's what she did," replied the man at the opposite side of the bar. " Don't look so heart-broken, Tommy ; you couldn't appreciate a scene like that ! ""Couldn't 'hey? Couldn't I appreciate a purty girl ? " smacking his thick lips. " An' a new one at that." " Three new ones, Tommy."" Aumm ! Lor' ! an' the first in ten weeks ! " groaned a big blonde cowboy." Twelve," corrected the bar-keeper gravely. "Twelve, is it? Boys, let's give 'em a recep',"
lifting high his glass." No shootin' in it, Jerry." Nop ! " and Jerry leaped high in the air and cracked his heels hilariously. "Jest chin music this time. And, say, Utah, fill up fer--" he took a hasty and half-regretful glance all round--"seven, eight, ten," his eye resting at last on mine-- "ye in it, stranger ? ""Sure," I answered; "that is, if you'll tell me what it's all about."" Well, if I ain't--" began one."Where've you been lately, anyhow? " from another." Say, you don't look like a tenderfoot," this from Tommy. "Hain't ye sot yer eye on this yet ?" and he thrust one of the yellow posters close under my nose.Having learned something of social amenities at Mike's, I caught the paper from Tommy's hand with a laugh, and read, to an accompaniment of remarks as the liquor trickled out and was passed across the bar:"GREAT NIGHT AT THE GRAND.Four New Stars from the East.LEROY C. CONVERS, Character Impersonator, In New Acts Entire--A Great Hit in the East.LA BELLE HARRIE,The Dashing Serio-Comic, in an Original Repertory.MISS NORAH McALLISTER,Song and Dance and Jig Artist.New Songs--New Dances--New Costumes.MISS SYDNEY STARR,Vocalist,--English Ballads,--Scotch Folk Songs,--Irish Melodies."Following this came a string of flowery eulogy, elaborated to absurdity ; but this I did not attempt to read, for Jerry was clamouring : "Finish the story, Utah. No, go back and begin over for his nibs," nodding toward me." You see," replied Utah, addressing himself now to me, "the quartette came last night, and went to the boarding-house straight, and Mike had left orders for them to come early to-day to his office. Well, Mike came in here about an hour ago, and he was just a bit rusty."And he said they'd all showed up except 'the star,' and while he was talking about to-night's blowout and the new attractions, she came in." He had seen the others at the house, but he had not seen her, and he had been cussing about her just before she came in ; but when she came toward him with her head held high, he came out with his widest smile and held out his hand."' This is Mr. Aiken ?' she asks." ` This is Mike's,' he says, beaming more yet. ` And you are Miss Sydney--'" ` Starr,' she adds, and draws away her hand just as he seemed about to lay his left fist over it." ` Mr. Aiken,' she goes on, stepping back a bit, with a grand, fine lady air, `there has been a terrible mistake. I have assisted in concert work and filled a short engagement with a monologue artist--a lady. When I engaged with your eastern agent it was to sing--it was only as a singer.'Well?' says Mike." ` I was somewhat puzzled and much surprised at some of the things said by the--the people who came out with me, but I thought they--'" She hesitated and blushed. Yes, she did. And then suddenly her manner changed." ` Mr. Aiken, will you tell me what is required of your singers, and how, if at all, your methods differ from those of any respectable concert manager? ' "Utah threw out his hands and turned his eyes ceilingward. " It's no use, gents, I can't give it to you straight. You know Mike; first he whirled in and tried the rediculous lay, said he wanted her just to sing Sunday School hymns, and do a little hornpipe in a Salvation Army bonnet, and then something in her face seemed to stop him, and he tried the sarcastic dodge, and asked her what her little game was, anyhow." Utah's voice fell."Then her eyes blazed. 'If you will speak with me as a man of business, I will put my position before you, sir,' she says. ` I came here expecting to sing upon the stage of your theatre. Opera, even comic opera, I was told, was not much patronised by the plain Western people ; and instead of these, songs, ballads, choruses, and novelties of the day were given before the regular performance. I would be asked to take no part in this, he said, only to sing.'" Well, Mike broke loose then, and let her know that she'd have to go the whole figure; she was here, and at his expense. You know he has to forward fares to get them out west so far. And she couldn't pay him back. God! you should have seen her face then. `You're here,' he says at the end, 'and here you stay ; there's a forty dollar fare due me, and the manager writes that I must put up the money for your new stage dresses, too. When you've paid that back and your board, we'll talk about your quitting.'"Well, sir, I thought at first she was going to faint, but she pulled herself together somehow, and seemed to be making a sort of mental calculation; and then she says, looking like a piece of marble:" ` I see my position, sir--see it so clearly that I shall not humble myself to plead where mercy and pity, and even honour, are unknown terms. Since I must enter purgatory while on earth, so be it; but understand me, I shall never be what you have planned to make me. I have been trapped ; your treacherous contract binds me to conform to the rules of this theatre, but it binds me for six months only, and not another day do I remain in your degrading services.' Then she walked out, and Mike ripped out a string of oaths and threats, and went back to his office."There was a long moment of silence, and then one of the men asked in a shamefaced way" Do you think it was a bluff act jest ter git herself talked about? "" Must a been," said another." No, sir. I believe the girl was square," replied
the bar-tender, " and I think Mike believed it." "Golly blue," softly murmured Tommy.It was Jersey Pete who stepped out before the rest and pulled out a roll of money."Gents," said he, "Mike's been a mighty good friend to the boys--some of 'em--but seems as of he ain't acted real white in this biz ; an' what I say is, whe'll chip in an' donate t'ords sendin' that gal back to where she'd rather be than here."A few were sceptical, but most of the group had in them that touch of crude chivalry which goes far to redeem some of the rough places of the West, and the purse was made up. Jersey Pete, as its author, or instigator, was chosen by unanimous consent to be the bearer of the gift who should wait upon Miss Starr and proffer her her freedom.As Jersey stowed away the " fund " in a capacious

pocket, one of the group approached him and said:" How much do you want ter risk on a square bet, Jersey, hey?"" What bet?" grunted Jersey Pete."On the gal. I'll put up anything that you'll meet that she takes yer money."" Ain't yours in it, too ? "" Yes, mine's in et; ketch me bluffin' when there's a nice gal in the case. But the gal's kiddin' of ye; she'll take the cases."" Waal, that's what we give it fur, ain't it? " snapped the delegate."Yep, that's all right. Only, she won't go."" Look'y here, Pony Braddock, do you know that gal? ""Nop."" Then why, in tarnation blazes--"" Aw' come off, Pete," drawled the big blonde cowboy. " D'you s'pose it's in natur' fer a girl to be as green as that one is playin' at ? She's got a game to play, er else she's tryin' fer a new sort of sensation, and is workin' fer the sympathy of the crowd. But go ahead, sonny, I don't begrudge my money; only I'm a tellin' ye, mind, and I'm ready to back it, she won't go."
CHAPTER VI
MAC' BECOMES INTERESTINGTHAT night I visited Mike's in company with the Deacon, whose other name was Tom Hall. Mac' himself had begun to be hilarious at an early hour, and had no more desire for our company than had we for his.
Already I knew his habits well enough to feel sure that in hilarity was safety so far as business was concerned : for Mac', when he had anything serious afoot, never indulged in any form of strong drink, while, to see him drinking at the bar, or in the wine rooms, was confirmation strong that this was an off night, and that the eye of the watcher might relax its vigilance.As I saw him come out from the dining-room, he was talking confidentially with a day boarder, who occupied a story and a half on the city outskirts, and let rooms therein. She was a big woman, with a good-natured manner, and as I neared the half-open door I could hear her reply distinctly"Why, I can't be sure about both of them tomorrow ! But by the end of the week you can have them, sure ; and the one you saw you can have to-morrow any time after--well, say one o'clock ! "
Again Mac's reply was lost behind his thick moustache, and I dared not tarry to hear more."MacIntyre is making up for lost time to-night," commented the Deacon, as we sat at a small table on the main floor at Mike's that evening, with beer glasses before us, and the music of a piano and three fiddles torturing our ears. " I take note that he don't seem to have much use for us, to-night! " and he drained his glass, eying me closely the while."Seen too much of us for the past Sew days," I suggested by way of explanation. But I had noted some time since that our merry friend had a decided preference for places where we were not.This continued until almost the end of the night, and then, as the Deacon and I ranged ourselves before the bar for a supporting libation, suddenly a hand came down upon my shoulder, and I turned to see Mac', who, crowding himself between us, insisted that it was his treat.When the glasses were emptied, he began to fumble foolishly in one pocket after another, and when he had at last settled the score and we turned to go, he drew back. He had "got-nother-'ngagemen'-mos'fer-fergot-'bout," and he hurried away toward the card-room, zigzagging as he went.My interest in Mac' received a fresh impulse when the night clerk from the hotel came, making his way through the crowd about the tables, and placed a telegram in my hand.It was in code from one of our secret service men, and when interpreted meant : " An attack upon a Cheyenne coach--incoming--is planned for this week; watch Mac', and if he attempts to leave town prevent it--if possible--without showing your hand."Having read this, I joined MacIntyre, and from then until dawn I was not far from him.When at last he turned his face toward our roof-

tree, I linked my arm in his in friendly fashion, and accommodated my steps and missteps to his.Indeed, so unsteady was he that he lost his hat twice, his coat became awry, his hands and garments soiled ; and at last, while fumbling in various pockets for "tha 'an-ker-shiff sniff," he drew out with it a small flat case, satin-covered and worn, as if by too much carrying.He did not observe it as it fell from the folds of the handkerchief, so I secured it, and put it in an inner pocket of my own.There was no doubt that Mac' was maudlin drunk by this time, but if he knew aught of the projected stage robbery, he was a marvel among drunkards, for when I was fully convinced that his condition was genuine I tried to draw him out, but without success.For this reason I turned at last toward my own small room and lumpy couch in a most unamiable mood, and was cross when the bell-boy came running after me down the hall with a crumpled-up telegraph envelope in his hand." I picked this here up when you sent me out," he explained, with a grin. " The night clerk was goin' past, an' he said 'twas your'n, an' I was to set here an' give it to ye."I glanced at the envelope. " Did you read it?" I questioned." Nop ; can't. Wish't I could!"" Did the clerk read it ? "" Um, um ! Guess he was too sleepy ; he didn't even stop ter cuff my ears."I tossed the boy a dime, and passed on.The telegram was not mine, but was addressed to MacIntyre, but I took it to my room without a qualm of conscience, and read it in haste."Meet me to-morrow," the slip read ; "morning train.--VAL."" A woman," I muttered, and went back to Mac's room and listened at the door. I had left him quiet, and had extinguished the lamp; and now, after a moment of investigation, I crumpled the envelope and its contents, much as it had been at first, and tossed it over the half-open transom." It won't surprise him to find it on the floor in the morning," I muttered, retracing my steps. " And I can witness the arrival of ` Val,' as well as if he knew that I knew." And then I remembered that I had planned a rather early rising upon my own account.In writing to Allan Eversoll and his sister, thus putting an end, as I thought, to his hopes where his lost wife was concerned, I had omitted returning to Mrs. Carolyn a little packet containing some tiny relics of the missing girl. They were only a scrap of the jacket found by the river, a few lines in the handwriting of the lost wife, and some memoranda. I had delayed the forwarding of these--at first by an oversight,and afterward with intent; but now,I had assured myself, the parcel must go, and with it the knowledge, incidentally conveyed, that I was again in the west.And then putting a hand to the pocket where this parcel was stored away, I drew out with it another--MacIntyre's small, worn satin box.I turned it over in my hand for a moment, and then, with as little compunction as I had felt when reading the telegram, I pressed the spring, the lid flew up, and the contents lay open in my hand.And now I quivered with excitement. In my hand lay a card, closely written over in a delicate handwriting ; and beside it a pair of ear-drops, two small but perfect diamonds, in a setting of foreign make.And these jewels had been minutely described to me not a month since ! While the writing upon the card--I had its counterpart in the little package upon the table before me, the package addressed to Allan Eversoll's sister ; and the handwriting was fine and difficult to duplicate, and the note had surely been penned by her--should I say, dead hand? Perhaps I for upon the card this was written" I beg you to release me. I will give you my sacred promise never to betray you in any manner, and I will give you all the rest-everything save the diamond drops, which are very dear to me. Only release me."I sat and thought, and shuddered.Was this the explanation, then, after all? And how simple! how direct ! how horrible ! How more than probable !A long time I sat and gazed, and pondered, and ached with pity for the dead and the living.And when at last I rose, sighing, and turned toward the east, the day had come, and I told myself that the chapter and the search were surely ended-that she whom I set out to seek a few short weeks ago was dead.But her destroyers ! And now I started, and my mouth was set and my eyes fierce, for there was no one to see; and I vowed that Jerry MacIntyre should never slip through my fingers until I knew what had been his part in the tragedy, and had seen him punished as he deserved.CHAPTER VII
WATCHING MACINTYREWITH the first gleam of sunlight shining across my floor, I opened my door and went softly to MacIntyre's room. He was breathing heavily, and I knew he would not be astir for hours.While I listened at the door, the quiet of the house made me realise, all in a moment, that a heaviness was creeping over my limbs and pressing down my eyelids.I had learned to throw off mental anxieties almost at will, and now brain and body were in accord, and returning to my own room, I threw myself across my bed and slept.But I had also learned to wake at the right time, and in just five hours I was awake, refreshed, and standing again before MacIntyre's door.He was still sleeping, and I gave a sharp knock upon the door and retired promptly around the corner of the cross hall, only two doors away ; then, after a few moments of waiting, I went back again-this time quite silently. The sleeping-rooms in this house of entertainment were mere closets, with the one window midway between the angles of the outer walls, and directly opposite the door.The transom was still half open overhead, and while I noted this, I heard a sound as if of stockinged feet upon a bare floor, and a moment after the window-shade went up with a rattle. Then came to my ear

an exclamation in the tone of a man startled and terrified--" Good God!" Instantly, noiselessly, I was down upon one knee, with an eye close to the keyhole, the key to which I was now glad to feel in my own pocket.MacIntyre was standing directly opposite the door and close to the window, but on one side, as if fearful of being seen from without ; and the profile, turned half away from me, was startled and pallid.For some moments the man stood and gazed motionless, save for the convulsive working of the fingers of the left hand. And then, while still hugging the wall, his arm shot out, and his curtain was jerked down with a noisy whirr.A moment more, and I was pounding at the door with one hand, while with the other I turned the key in the lock, the next I was within the room, talking volubly and explaining that I had helped him to bed, a fact he seemed but vaguely to remember, and for which he was not at all grateful. Still, he made a manful pretence of being absorbed in his toilet, until I, exclaiming against the darkness, crossed to the window and put out my hand to raise the shade.Then, and with a burst of profanity, he bade me desist. He had risen with a tearing headache, and could not bear the light. It was simply maddening. If I did not like the climate--then I was not there by invitation, etc., etc. As for himself, if he could only get to a barber, he would have his head shaved. And he finished by imploring me to go and find one for him.I was more than willing to go, for while he talked I had heard the door next to his close sharply, and the occupant of the room go heavily down the hall.As I went obligingly out, Mac' called after me:

"And say, old man, if you'll join me after breakfast, I'll show ye some of the lions."In another moment I had slipped into the next room, a companion to that I had just left, and like it in all particulars.Here the window was open and the curtain up, and I was beside it with one stride. But although I could see from that window all that could be seen from the one in MacIntyre's room, there was nothing beyond, and visible, save a brick wall opposite with a narrow alley between and shutting out all else ; here and there, at regular intervals, were windows, like the one from which I looked, except that those upon the floor corresponding with this were lower, so that I could look down into a part of the room at my right, and nearly all of the one into which Mac' must have been gazing so earnestly.But why had he done so? I wondered. The room was larger than the ones we both occupied, and it was better furnished ; for the rest it was vacant ; what was there to be seen ? But wait ! Yes, the door--the outer door ! was it not a little ajar ! And, yes ! surely that is a hand--or the fingers of a hand--upon the door-knob! Perhaps--and just then the door swings inward, and a woman enters and stands for a moment looking all about the room. She is so close that I can see each feature distinctly ; just the face of a good-natured, middle-aged miner's wife, one might think. Can it be this woman who almost paralysed Mac'?And now she puts up her hand and pulls down the window from the top, and her keen black eyes peer over it and presently meet mine.Instantly I lean out. Mac's window is closed and the curtain still drawn. I bow politely." Madam, are these rooms to let ? " I ask gravely.No--they ain't ! " she replies crustily. " Not to your sort ! " And she turns away. An instant later, and she has gone.As I cautiously turned the handle of the door, I heard Mac's voice on the other side, and drew back."Hi, you!" Mac' was calling in an undertone; "Kitty, Nelly, Daisy, Pansy--you come here ! Do you want to earn a dollar ? If you do, just find some other rooms for me on the other side of the house--mind ; and when you see the barber come this way, just steer him there, and call me in. It's too--gloomy here, face to face with a--brick wall ! "Then I started, remembering my commission, and when the girl had gone, ran downstairs.I had not yet breakfasted, but when I found the barber, I greeted the day clerk at his desk." Charley," I asked affably, " what's the building just back of us, to the westward, eh ?"" That ? Oh, that's a sort of row of--mostly stores below, and furnished rooms upstairs ; belongs to a woman."" Big ? " I suggested ; " black eyes and sort of quick of movement ? ""That's it! That's Roxy Higgins! She's the one woman in this town the boys, even the roughest cow-puncher in the town, 'll hump himself to oblige. Lost her man in a mine explosion. Fellows wheeled in and made up a good fat purse, and Rox has kept it a-turning ; and now she's just gettin' that row finished up."" Er--and does she take roomers ? "" Well, that depends. She won't often take strangers --nor the folks from the theatres. She's queer, is Roxy."It was not wise to press the investigation and arouse the curiosity of the clerk, and I believed myself able to find out what had drawn MacIntyre's attention to the room in Roxy Higgins' new second floor, and caused him such terror. But this must be done cautiously, and I went into breakfast, feeling that I could afford to wait.And now I began to question his need of the barber. Mac' was a handsome man, in a strong, rough fashion, and he wore his hair rather long, and standing well about his ears and neck and down low upon his temples, while his mouth and chin were always covered with a handsome beard and long and curling moustache.What, then, was my surprise when I encountered, at the foot of the stairs, a man whose broad grin showed a heavy-lipped, ugly mouth, a smooth upper lip, a chin too prominent for beauty, and a head cropped close, and showing quite bald just above a low and protuberant brow.It was MacIntyre, but if I had not been prepared for the metamorphosis I might have passed him by without recognition. The sudden change startled me. I refrained from showing a surprise which might have given him still greater reason for anxiety than that which preyed upon his mind. My role with him and his confederate--for such I believed the Deacon to be--had been that of a rather easy-going, loose-tongued adventurer ; and this, with an assumption of self-conceit, and a cock-sureness I was at times far from feeling, had served as the best of passports to the confidence of the pair.I could see that Mac' was anxious as to the effect of this change; and when I announced that if he had " wanted to rig up a reg'lar disguise he couldn't have

done better," I could see that he was immensely relieved." It's just a fool wager of mine," he declared. " I swore to the Deacon that the next time I got drunk I'd shave my face and shear my head, and I don't go back on my word !--not much!" I saw his covert glances sweep the room in search of the Deacon, and then travel swiftly toward the office clock.He went in to breakfast soon after, and I retired to my room. Of two things I was quite assured : he had seen something, or someone, in Roxy Higgins' rooms that had startled and troubled him, and he was anxious lest his late sleep should in any way delay his appearance at the depot, when the train from the east arrived.As for myself, I was equally bent upon being at the depot, unseen if possible ; and rightly guessing that Mac' would avoid any chance of being delayed at the last moment by setting out early for the train, I strolled down as far as Mike's, where, from one of the windows in the bar-room, I could see my quarry leave the house.He was walking slowly as he came down the hotel steps, and as he moved forward, glanced carefully from side to side, hastening his steps as he crossed the street, a movement that surprised me, until I saw him step quickly into an " emporium," whence he emerged after a few minutes, pushing a small parcel into a side pocket.I did not leave my post by the window until I heard the shrill whistle of the incoming train, and then I hastened around the corner and mingled with the waiting crowd." He will board the car," I said to myself, when I saw how close he had drawn to the platform's edge.But this, while it would be easy, would be a somewhat conspicuous feat, and I noted that he was casting swift, anxious glances about him as the engine of the train pulled past him.There were numerous open windows in the chair-car just ahead, and suddenly, as the train moved slowly past, he threw back his head, lifted himself for an instant, and the next shot out a long arm, and let something drop inside a window.It was the paper parcel, and I had seen him, just as the train came around the curve, write two or three words upon the whitish brown wrapping paper, carelessly, a; if for pastime.But the face above it was not a careless face ; and now, as I remembered this, I peered forward, but I only saw a bent head, and a coil of dark hair as the passenger stooped, probably in pursuit of the fallen parcel. And then, to my surprise, MacIntyre drew back, and, keeping abreast of the chair-car, moved along until it stopped.But he made no effort to advance, and when the passengers began to step down upon the platform he still stood and gazed with the curious crowd.But if I had not lost a movement of his, I had also kept an eye upon the window into which the parcel had been tossed.True, I had not seen much--only a head, bent and averted. Then, by pressing forward, I saw two gloved hands lifted to the back of the dark head, and a slim figure draw itself erect, so that head and shoulders became invisible. As this figure moved forward to leave the seat, a piece of whitish brown paper, crumpled into a ball, was tossed aside. I sprang forward, and I was on the rear platform and inside the coach before the first of the passengers had left the front platform"My--wife!" I panted, as a burly brakesman put out a detaining hand. "Don't--stop me!" and with my eyes fixed upon the moving backs, I pushed forward, and he let me pass.Then my eyes dropped to the floor, and a moment later, when I had caught up a little ball of paper, I turned back, sprang past the brakesman, and dropped to the platform.And not a moment too soon, for MacIntyre was making his way slowly into the station and through it, while a woman's form followed a little way behind. No signs, however, passed between them, and he never once looked back.When he had reached the first corner, he did not turn with the crowd, but taking a side path that skirted Mike's at the rear, and turning east at the corner farthest from the town, kept on until he had reached a house standing quite by itself in a small grass-grown enclosure. Pausing here, he opened the gate and passed in, and a moment later the woman followed him, closing the gate after her.Here, for the time, I left them, and hastened to a spot where some men were leisurely chipping at a pile of stones, in preparation for a foundation to rise at some indefinite future day. Here I sat down and unfolded the crumpled paper.It was as I had guessed. The parcel had contained a veil, and its newness had shown in its folds, as they waved in a faint breeze.Upon the paper was scrawled these words:" Wear this. Be careful--follow me--but do not know me."And now I, as well as my friend Mac', had something new to think about.CHAPTER VIII 
THE GIRL FOR PONY JACKPROMINENT among the habitues at Mike's was the broad-shouldered, typical Westerner, Jack Braddock, known to his intimates as Pony Jack. He was a mixture of cowboy, mountaineer and miner, for he had been all three. Arrogant and dictatorial in argument, and ready to " pull a weapon " upon the smallest provocation, he was feared by many and liked by few, and I soon discovered that he had learned to place a proper value upon himself, and to carry himself with a high air when sober, and with a swagger when not.In this latter condition, too, he was more than ready to quarrel, and his tongue became a profane and abusive weapon. In short, those who considered Pony Jack a dangerous man sober called him a terror when drunk.He was a handsome fellow, in a certain aggressive fashion--blonde, with fair and flowing hair, and a drooping, light moustache. That he was in high favour with Mike, I saw on the first day of my appearance.He had been an attentive listener when the clerk told the story of the young woman who had declared herself deceived, and had appealed for release from the contract she had signed in ignorance of the requirements of a Western stage.He it was, in fact, who had made the wager withJersey Pete, declaring that the girl was playing a part, and that she would not accept their proffered aid.I had exchanged the Western form of greeting with this personage, but I had not been drawn toward him, either by interest or curiosity; and when I had observed him among the idlers at the depot on the occasion of my sly visit to that place at the heels of MacIntyre, I had avoided him, of course.But it had struck me then that the fellow seemed interested in MacIntyre's movements, and when, on the following day and for two days after, I saw more than once proofs that Pony Jack Braddock, while ostentatiously holding aloof and seeming to be quite unacquainted with Mac', was nevertheless taking notes of that person's movements, I became anxious to learn his motives.My interest was stimulated when I discovered that Jack, as well as myself, was paying visits of reconnaisance to the cottage upon the outskirts, to which I had shadowed Mac' and the mysterious woman of the black veil.I was approaching the place from an easterly direction that morning, so early that I had felt little fear of being observed, when I saw Pony Jack come suddenly around the corner, and in the very act of passing the cottage from the opposite direction.As he neared the entrance he slackened his pace, and I thought he intended to go in ; but if so, he thought better of it, and came on and straight toward me.We met with the utmost cordiality, and when I declared myself " trying to walk far enough to get up an appetite for one of our hotel meals," he declared that he could do better by me, took my arm, and led me, quite willingly now, to Mike's cafe.He wag evidently bent upon being agreeable, and when he referred to our first meeting, and the occasion of his bet with Jersey Pete, I asked after the success of Jersey's mission."It failed," was the reply. " She refused--very sweetly, Jersey said ; but she refused. I fancy she might have accepted if the loan had come from Jersey only. She wouldn't want to be under obligations to a number of strange men, I suppose. Cuss it ! I wish't I'd 'a gone to her."" If it had been a loan," I corrected. " You see, if Sydney Starr is really a deceived and ill-used young woman, she would shrink from taking a loan; for then she must give her true name, and her address, as guarantee of good faith.""They didn't ask that," he replied."No, but they would have some right to doubt her, else.""Well, I'm sorry she did not take it! Some of the fellows have grown sceptical now, and swear she wants to stay." He looked at me keenly."Which shows that she was wise in refusing their aid," I smiled.I had not thought it policy to display too much sympathy for this stranded waif--admitting her to be such--but I had meant to see her soon, and to proffer my services in such way as she might choose to accept them, but on that same afternoon I learned that the wily Mac' had suddenly departed for Deadwood. I followed him in disguise, but discovered nothing except that he seemed to be on the search for somebody. He returned to Cheyenne ; I followed a day later, and when I arrived I learned that he had contrived to get a knife-thrust between his ribs.Of one thing I had by now convinced myself, and

this was that the part taken by the Deacon, in whatever game the pair might be playing, was a passive one at present.The two saw each other daily, and thrice daily, not alone, at all times, and sometimes not so much as exchanging greetings ; but here, as in New York, at some time, morning and evening, these two met, and I noted that whereas in the eastern city the Deacon had acted the part of cicerone, and showed the better acquaintance with the city, here in the west it was Mac' who knew his Cheyenne, and was able to give points to his companion. But while the one was an active participant in the rough pleasures of the new town, the other showed only a passive, almost, at times, a bored interest in the gaieties or the business chances, and while he went about, and saw and heard, he said little, and seemed almost indifferent. If he watched his partner, he did it with consummate cunning; and if he sought to avoid him, on the other hand, he concealed the effort with equal skill.And the same, as to watching or being watched, could have been said of MacIntyre. Certainly there was no show of avoidance upon his part, or of espionage.In truth, I had about assured myself that the pair kept tally, each upon the other, by mutual consent. Then came Mac's "accident " of the knife-thrust, given across a card-table. Such things were too common there to create a ripple, and I was somewhat surprised to find that the Deacon had installed himself as nurse.It was in a state of accepting, if indifferent, interest in whatever I might encounter that I was on my way across the town, when I came upon Pony Jack standing before the Gold Room, with hands in pockets, as idle as myself."Hello !" hailed Pony Jack, as he fell into step with me. Going to ',Mike's'? Well, it's worth while now, since the new star has concluded not to quit the town just yet. D'ye ever know Mike to advertise any one like that before? Letters half a foot long ! Why, sir, she's just rakin' in the coin for Mike! "Upon the big poster on the new bill board I read in large letters, and preceding a list of lesser lights, the name " Sydney Starr, queen of vocalists and ballad-singers." It brought back to my memory my first appearance at Mike's, a few weeks earlier, and the interest I had taken in the barkeeper's story."So the young woman who was--""Who was too good for her berth ?" he interrupted. "Well, sir, I won my bet. She didn't go ; and she played it fine on the fellows. But, Moses! they don't resent it. She can just about walk over all mankind in this place already ! She's captured the town, has Miss Starr ! ""So you approve of her? " I said, just to say something, and with a touch of scorn in my voice."Well, rather! So will you--only," with a facetious leer, and a tapping finger upon the revolver in his belt, "don't you try any grab game ! I've had to warn about a dozen of the fellers a'ready. She's the girl for me! And it's dead earnest--this time!""I'm not a ladies' man, Jack," I said carelessly ; " but if I were, you'd fight fair, wouldn't you ? "I smiled in speaking, and he smiled back, as he answered: " Oh, yes, I'd fight fair ; but--I'd fight ! " And I knew he meant it.He was a stalwart, handsome, rough animal, with a record of bloodshed and wild living, but I looked at him with a touch of pity at the thought that so

much strength could be so swayed and dominated by a creature such as was likely to be found at Mike's. Already I had mentally weighed in the balance Miss Sydney Starr.
We had reached the theatre now, and already a crowd was about the bar. Now and then, through disjointed fragments of talk, I could hear the name of " Starr," " Sydney, the Star," repeated in admiring tones, and I noted that Pony Jack frowned more than once.As the orchestra began to tune up in the hall or theatre beyond, he slipped away and went up to the gallery, where I saw him soon after in a box quite by himself, and directly opposite the stage."The boys are out in force to-night," I said to Mike, who beamed and rubbed his hands with unction."You bet ! " he replied fervently. "They're out to see my star. Gad ! she's a daisy, sir ! She beats them all. Heard about her yet? " I shook my head.Mendacity is in the air at Mike's, and thrusting into my hands one of the new yellow bills and the evening's programme, he hurried away to greet a newcomer, saying over his shoulder, " Read that." Mike was a busy host after nine o'clock p.m.CHAPTER IX
SYDNEY STARRIF Mike's bill of the play amazed me with its reiterated laudations of Sydney Starr, the talk of a group of men just entering increased that amazement."Mike must have struck a bonanza," one of them was saying. " It's ' Sydney Starr' in letters a foot long all over the place. Who is Sydney Starr, anyhow ? ""She's just the dashiest, recklessest, sassiest, purtiest bit of calico you ever saw. Say ! you know how Pony Jack treats Mike's girls ? Well, you ort ter see her lay him out ! He follers her round like a big yaller dorg.""She better watch out fer him all the same, though," put in another. " Pony Jack's an onery cuss." And so the talk went on." She sang 'like a bird,' and 'like an angel.' There had never been anything like her at Mike's. She was a cruel flirt, and already the officers at the fort were her slaves. She was just filling his house, and he'd raised her wages after the second night." All this I heard, and much more." But the best thing yet," declared a tall miner,"was the way she shook Mike's 'pen,'" as they called his boarding-house. "She just went out and engaged a room to suit herself, had her traps moved, and then went and told the old man. And he shut up, sir, right

after the first cuss word ! Oh, she owns this town now, does Miss Sydney Starr."At eleven o'clock, an early hour at Mike's, I was watching for the new star.They had not overpraised her. As she came lightly forward, her beautiful face wreathed in smiles, I could hardly believe my eyes.Was this the girl who had begged for release from a horrible, undreamed-of situation ? Who had shrunk at the thought of the wine-room, and doubted her own ears when told the duties which, under her contract, she would be required to perform? She was the personification of fearlessness, self-confidence, and gaiety. But the fearlessness was not boldness. The self-confidence might have been that of the drawing-room. She amazed and puzzled me, and going to my room in the early morning hours, I asked myself which was the role and which the real woman--the one who appealed for release to a brutal manager, or the one who smiled and sang, and kissed her hands to gamblers, rakes, and ruffians of every class and kind.As the following week passed I saw Sydney Starr more than once, on the stage and off, and each time the surprise was of a new sort, and the puzzle greater.There was a parade at the fort, and it was visitors' day.As the guest of one of the officers, I wandered about until we came to a group about a target, set at long range, even for a good shot. " Look," said the captain, and I paused with him.A tall young soldier stood in the foreground beside a graceful woman, who was holding out her hand for the pistol he had just loaded. " Look ! " again said the captain, and at the moment she raised the weapon,

and fired. There was a chorus of exclamations, and as the girl turned away I saw her face. It was Sydney Starr, and I ought to have known it. What other woman could have drawn about her such a circle of officers and other men, holding them slaves, and yet seemingly unconscious of her power?As she stood in the full sunlight, something in the attitude or expression, caused me to start and stare.Of whom did she remind me? Somewhere I had seen such eyes, such a pose, and turn of the head. But where ?It was merely a resemblance, I finally assured myself, and turned away with her laughter in my ears.The target practice seemed to interest La Belle Sydney beyond any other attraction, for, quite half an hour later, as the captain and I repassed the target and glanced down the range, she was still there.But she was seated on a camp-stool, and the group about her had withdrawn somewhat, leaving in close attendance upon her Pony Jack, who was standing erect, with a pistol in either hand, and his eye glancing moodily from the target to the girl ; and a young fellow, with the chevrons of a sergeant, who was down upon one knee beside her, his cap pushed back, and his handsome, boyish face flushed and smiling, while lie made no effort to conceal the adoration shining from his eyes.As he turned again toward the target, a tall lieutenant passed us and saluted. His face was serious, and he moved briskly, like one who goes upon a definite errand. But he paused abruptly beside the three before the target, and lifted his cap with soldierly grace. As he did so, the young man upon the ground beside her turned, and I saw the close resemblance between the two soldiers."Brothers?" I questioned." Yes, brothers," answered the captain ; " and Lieutenant Morton has that boy upon his mind and heart, I verily believe, day and night. The lad's a bit wild and flighty. I'm afraid he won't come out of this," and he nodded toward Sydney, "with a whole skin. He's badly smitten, and he can't or won't disguise it. It's fretting the lieutenant, too. He's wise beyond his years, and he dreads such an attachment for the boy."" They look a good sort," I said." They are a good sort. Fine old family. Phil went to West Point, and the cub, about a year ago, ran away and enlisted. Phil was at no end of trouble to get himself exchanged, and in the same troop with Bert--the boy's name's Hubert. He's high-strung, but there's good stuff in the lad if he'll only hold himself level."The gallery at Mike's ran around three sides of the long hall, passing behind a row of dingy boxes on two sides and broadening out on the third, where it overhung the lower floor and overlooked the stage.I was pacing around this gallery that night, when I came upon a group of three. The first I recognised as the young soldier of the target episode, the second as his officer brother. The third member of the group was Sydney Starr.As I approached, with Mike as my guide, there was, it seemed to me, an air of embarrassment about the group, even La Belle Sydney seeming, I thought, less at ease than was usual to her, and her glance, while presenting the young sergeant, rested upon him, for an instant, in what seemed to me almost appealing kindness. But it shot, the next instant, a cold look upon the elder brother, and then rested upon Mike, laughing and defiant.As I put out a hand to Lieutenant Morton, I felt still more that my greeting somehow covered an embarrassing pause. The flush in the cheek of the younger man burned hotly, and his look was rebellious, almost sullen. Even when I greeted him he only withdrew his eyes from the girl's face for an instant. Then, before either could speak, the voice of Pony Jack Braddock sounded close behind, loud, strident, and a bit unsteady." Oh, here you are, bliss Sydney! " he was saying. " Been looking all round the gallery for ye ! I've got a plan for some fun fer to-morrow. Say, come an' sit down over here, an' talk it over. It's better'n pistol practice."But the girl drew back with a little gesture of dissent. " M r. Jack," she said, "you have interrupted me as I was about to say 'Good evening' to these gentlemen. You really must not be so hasty. We can talk about to-morrow's plans an hour from now, can we not ! while these gentlemen--soldiers--have their fixed times to come and go." She put out her hand to Hubert Morton, and looked steadily in his face."Good-night, Mr. Morton," she said. " I thank you for teaching me the best way to load and fire. You will give me another lesson, I am sure. Only you must never again let me cause you to neglect a duty or incur a reprimand on my account. If I were a soldier, I should wish to be the best, the most prompt of any, and I should be proud to have such a soldier friend--only he must be a good soldier, and his duty must be first--always."She slipped her hand from his with a little friendly smile, turned toward the lieutenant and met his eyes, but hers no longer smiled." Lieutenant Morton," she said, " I trust that your brother will obey your orders none the less well for having heard mine. Good-night! " She did not proffer her hand, and as soon as the words had passed her lips, turned towards Pony Jack." Mr. Jack, you're a fine figure, but you're lacking in one thing, and that's politeness ! It is not polite to interrupt people, and it is not polite to be loud, and to demand when you should request. If you wish to count me among your friends, you must remember that I want my friends to be gentlemen, not blusterers ! I could forgive a man I liked a great many sins, but if he began to play the bully, I should despise him. But, Jack," her face breaking suddenly into a smile, " I don't want to despise you. You are just the big, strong fellow who should be a woman's friend and defender, and you ought to be a good friend--a true friend, Jack Braddock."Jack uttered an oath, and then checked himself" Look here," he broke out in his big voice, " if I've ever done anything mean, or tried the bullyin' dodge with you, it didn't come from where I live, an' it ain't me! I'm yer friend, and don't ye forget it!"" I won't," and she put out her hand to meet his ; " but I have certain tests for your friendship, Mr. Jack. And now you must really excuse me. The clock here," nodding toward the timepiece, " tells me that I am due in a moment in the dressing-room. I am to act as a substitute for Lora, Mr. Mike. It's all arranged with the stage manager. I hope you don't object to the change, Mr. Manager? I can dance--a little,'' and she laughed lightly.Mike beamed. "No," he replied. "If you give them an extra turn--anything--it'll go; only no extra charges, missy."" No extras ? " she caught at the words ; " only you'll let Lora's pay go on so long as I fill her place ? "" I don't know." Mike's face fell." But you must. I've stipulated for that with Mr. Dill. Look here, sir, I'll dance to-night, and after to-night it's 'no pay, no dance.' And I'll take up a collection for Lora ! "To those who knew Mike this proposal was daring; but he smiled amiably." Understand me, Mr. Aiken," she continued gravely, "if I dance for Lora, there must be no cut in her salary, no fines on pretext of absence. She must have her full pay ; she needs it."But Mike shook his head. " Rules are rules, my dear," he said. " The stage manager, you know, has exclusive control, and we can't relax our discipline. Besides, you know, my dear, we never remit a fine.""Oh!" Sydney started as if suddenly aroused.Then you have fined Lora already?"" The stage manager--"Mr. Aiken, let me understand you. Lora is ill. I saw her to-day, and brought the physician's certificate declaring her too ill to dance. I gave it to Mr. Dill, and seeing how put about he seemed at the omission of Lora's dance, I offered to fill her place. He accepted my offer. He even appeared pleased to do so. Now, I wished to do Lora a favour, and if I am not able to earn her night's salary for her, I shall not dance."This was too much for Mike's ugly temper, and he now let wrath rather than policy take the helm. Still, lie flattered himself that he was not inviting unfavourable criticism, for he indulged neither in curses nor
in drastic commands.Instead, he took from a table near at hand the programme for the evening." I see," he said, with exaggerated politeness, "your name is here for Lora's number."Sydney nodded."And it was put here with your consent?"Quite so."Then, of course, you are bound to fill the vacancy."I fully intend to."" To respond to all encores ? "" I hope there will be such," she declared.Mike moved back a pace and bowed mockingly.You see," he said, " that you are bound to fill Lora's place by your own promise. But the proposition came from you. My dear Miss Sydney, don't you see that you can't claim anything from me for yourself? While Lora has no right to claim salary, and is bound under the rules to pay a fine."" Then you won't remit the fine? "" Impossible, my dear young lady."" Say no more ! " she cried, and turned away (f)rom Mike and towards Pony Jack and the group around him." Gentlemen," she said, with the most alluring of smiles, " I shall dance to-night for your pleasure, and to help, as I had hoped, a friend in need. If my dancing pleases you, and you wish me to dance again--" She paused and smiled." It will please ! It will! You must!" came the swift answers."And I will; but Lora must be paid-paid in full Paid liberally! I no longer look to the manager nor the tyrant stage manager. I look--Lora will look--to you!" Another swift smile, which seemed to

every man to have been meant for himself and no other, a glance toward the now frowning Mike, and she was gone.As the last flutter of her soft garments vanished through the doorway leading stageward, Jersey Pete slapped a leather-breeched thigh, and then swung his burly fist aloft." So help me Davy Jones if I ain't one man as'll stand by that there girl! Who's with me from the word go?" And a chorus of voices gave back a medley of exclamatory words, all having but one meaning, and then Pony Jack's big laugh joined with the fine crashing notes of the band upon the balcony." That's one on you, dike, my daisy! "But Alike was no longer near them. lie was hastening toward the stage manager's den, and as lie passed in, one of the observant onlooking citizens said in an undertone to his neighbourThey'll carry their point, of course, but, all the same, dike's got to take his `mad' out of somebody, and he will, too."" You bet," agreed the other; " and if one can keep awake long enough, one might sec who gets the undercut, eh ? "" Oh, it won't be to-night," said the first speaker. "That ain't Mike's way. It'll come to-morrow night, maybe."" And it'll be--who d'ye s'pose 'twill be ? "" Can't tell, but it's got to be someone of her friends. Come along, let's quit this gallery and take a look downstairs."CHAPTER X
PONY JACK'S MASTER
IF Mike had thought to forestall Sydney's first appearance as a dancer by a fine, chalked under Lora's name upon the dressing-room door, he found that her nimble fingers, even in the few moments she still had left before her time to appear upon the stage, had accomplished the needful change, and two minutes before the moment for ringing up the curtain she stood at the wing ready and smiling, though her heart, under her gauzy corsage, was beating like a trip hammer, and her breath, behind the plumy fan at her lips, was coming in great gasps.And then, instead of the light and breezy measures that used to herald the appearance of " Lora, the Peerless Queen of the Ballet," the orchestra breathed out some soft strains, and Sydney Starr came gliding across the stage, sinuous and graceful.And as the slow, sweet music was gradually accelerated, and the graceful poses merged and melted, one into another, the house broke into a murmur that grew and increased until the audience arose as one man and cheered for the new dancer, who only came back to bow and smile and disappear again, leaving them to sit and marvel and exclaim over what was to many their first vision of the skirt dance at its best, and danced as few could dance it--a novel and chaste exhibition of grace.As I sat, under the spell like the rest, and only conscious for the moment of the charm of the vision that had passed, a voice said at my elbow" Well, Phil, what do you say to that? Have you ever seen in a drawing-room more grace, delicacy, modesty and beauty? Own up, Phil, she's--"" Hush, boy!" broke in the elder of the two Mortons.Did I ever dispute the girl's beauty and cleverness ? She's too clever. That's why I so dread her influence over you."" Phil, I tell you she's a good woman."And here? Dancing at Mike's? " There was cool contempt, bitterness almost, in the tone, and the young sergeant flushed hotly."Look here, Phil ! You seem to hate that girl. What do you know of her? " He paused, but his brother did not reply. " Why don't you answer? " he snapped. " Do you know her? "" No!" The reply came so promptly now that a less frank or more sophisticated person would have noted what seemed almost like relief in the elder brother's tone. But young Morton was simply relieved." I knew it," he declared, "and yet I have felt sometimes--you have made me feel as if you knew something against her ! "During the evening I kept near the two Mortons, one or the other, as much as was possible without causing them to think me, perhaps, too much interested in them and their affairs.Hubert was little more than a boy, in spite of his six feet and strapping shoulders, and it was an easy task to approach and know him.It needed only a word of praise, judiciously uttered, when the name of Sydney Starr was spoken, to win his hearty assent and approval of the speaker, and he

would talk readily enough upon all topics save those of a personal nature.Regarding his brother or himself, or any chance references to their past, he was most reserved. But I was to see him in another mood before the curtain went up for the second part.It was already past midnight, and the gaming, drinking, and jesting were at their height, while Hubert was sitting at a small table and sipping some wine with Sydney Starr, and two or three other young women clustered opposite.Pony Jack was glowering at the group, and fingering the big revolver he always carried in evidence and handled with unpleasant freedom, when Philip Morton, his face pale and weary-looking, came up the stairs that ran behind the upper bar, and passing Jack, went with quick strides toward his brother."Hubert," he said, bending over the boy's shoulder, " are you aware that it is almost two o'clock ? "" Yes," said the other shortly." And," a little lower, " that your time is up ? "The young soldier started, and something like a groan escaped his lips, then the sound changed to a short, mirthless laugh, and he pushed back his chair and threw up his head with an impatient gesture while he unbuttoned his fatigue jacket to glance at his watch. Then he arose straight and stiff, lifted his hand in salute and stood at attention." Lieutenant Morton," he said gravely, " I desire to report to you, sir."In spite of himself, his brother smiled. Hubert was of his company and under his command, and by this manoeuvre he had, if the elder chose to recognise the act and intervene, saved himself a reprimand, or maybe something more serious still.The lieutenant's reply came after a moment's pause. " Very good. You may return to your quarters at once, and--stop--my horse is at Jerry's. Get it and ride it in at once."The two men faced each other for a moment, erect and silent, command and entreaty mingled in the eye of the elder, obedience, defiantly yielded, upon the face of the younger.I had been lounging, for a few moments, at the table nearest theirs, and now I turned with the intention of following the young soldier, for whom, as I thought, Pony Jack was waiting, ready to thrust a quarrel upon him if possible. But as young Morton came abreast of the big plainsman it was evident that he had himself under excellent control, for when the swaggerer lurched forward, uttering some rough challenge, the youngster stalked past him erect and soldierly, and Pony Jack, uttering a harsh laugh, made his way toward us.A few paces away he was halted by Mike, and for a moment seemed to listen intently and with interest, then, for an instant, he turned and gazed after the young man, just disappearing down the curving stairway.I I is look was sinister, and the smile of the theatrical manager was as ill in its way as was the other's frown. Then suddenly Alike seemed to note the eye of the lieutenant fixed upon Pony Jack, and uttering a quick, low-spoken word or two, he turned away, while Jack came on and up to the group about the table.At the very moment when he paused beside it and laid a big hand upon the back of the chair occupied by Sydney Starr, Lieutenant Morton bent over her, almost directly in the face of Pony Jack, and said a few words in her ear.He was smiling a cold, conventional smile, and at his words she started and lifted her head, as if undecided.
Neither seemed for the moment to have noticed Pony Jack, and seeing that the girl had no eyes for him, the man turned his gaze from her to the lieutenant." Cap'n," he began, "you've made a ---- slick soldier boy of that little brother of yourn. Goes off at the word o' command straight's his own gun. I wonder what ye could make in that line out of me--huh ?"The lieutenant drew back a pace, and looked the big fellow over from head to foot."You've got the build," he said, after taking his slow survey, " and there's something already in your gait and the way you ride that looks like a cavalryman. But a man needs more than shape, and muscle, and ability to ride to make an acceptable soldier ; he needs staying qualities. However," went on the lieutenant, speaking almost blandly now, " I am not in the recruiting line. But there's my friend, Colonel Bolton, of the --th, now; he may be down soon. He's in Arizona just now. He's the man to say what such chaps as you are worth to the army. I'd like to hear his opinion--eh ? "Pony Jack's shoulders seemed suddenly to droop, and the hand at his belt dropped from the knifehandle, where for a moment it had rested. His lips moved, and he moistened them with the tip of his tongue, but he did not speak ; and Lieutenant Morton, after a moment, bent again toward Sydney Starr." We were about to decide upon a glass of wine, tte--tte," he said to her, in a tone of polite inquiry. "What do you say?"Sydney rose and moved away from the table." If the ladies will excuse me," she said, with a mockery of drawing-room politeness; "and the gentlemen," bowing elaborately, so as to include Jack in the salute. " I am at your service, Mr. Morton. Your box ? "" Number 10," he replied.A moment later, as I was sauntering about the open space at the back of the row of wooden cages which Alike called his "boxes," the door of No. 11 opened, and Mike himself looked out." Oh, Mr. Masters, come in, won't ye, and have a smoke and whatever else ye may fancy. I'd like to hear a little news of ye from Gawd's country, eh! D'ye see?"CHAPTER XI
IN BOX NO. 10SITTING in the stuffy box, I began to ask myself why I had accepted Mike's invitation. Of course, I could guess at a possible reason why the man might desire my society. It was his habit to sound newcomers who gave any evidence of being sportively inclined, and who might possibly carry a long purse. Then, too, he was given to studying all strangers suspected of mining interests or a desire to invest ; and lastly, I had been told that he was morbidly curious when anyone appeared who might, by any chance, be an officer of the law or detective.But I was not destined to learn Mike's object in making such friendly overtures, nor he to satisfy whatever curiosity lay at the bottom of his hospitality ; for we were hardly seated when we heard Sydney Starr's voice, low, but quite distinct, say--almost in my ear, it seemed, so narrow were the little coop-like compartments"Now, Lieutenant Morton, may I hear why I have been so honoured ? " There was the sound as of a glass suddenly set down. " Kindly refresh yourself with that stale cider champagne, so that we may finish our interview.""Bah ! " Then came the sound of sharply-struck glass, and again the girl's short, mocking laugh. " There ! " the lieutenant said quietly ; " now we can

proceed. The hilarity naturally to be expected from that fluid may come as we go on." It will," she replied shortly.	" It is the atmosphere ! " bitterly." So are several other things more odorous than agreeable. Stale tobacco for one, and--"" Wit," she broke in. " Did you bring me here to die of asphyxiation, Mr. Morton ?"" What ?" His tone was the mocking one now. " Have you not learned to love it yet ? "" Under some conditions."Pshaw ! " he broke in, " let us come to the point. Will you answer me a plain question?" Ask it."What are you doing here ? "" Really ! Enjoying your society, of course." Nonsense--" gruffly.And admiring your manners."I am in earnest. What is the object that has brought you here ?--a woman like you."" I am in search of adventure. I always longed to come west."" And dance upon Mike's stage ! "" Precisely ; though it might have been larger."" The life ? "The stage. But come! Why are you concerning yourself about me ? "" Because you are concerning yourself about me--" " Oh! " wearily." And mine."" And your what ? Come, let us turn the tables ! Let me catechise. Lieutenant Morton, why have you asked me to come here ? I wish to end this talk. Answer me--if you can ! "" I will ! Listen. Four years ago my mother

died and left her youngest boy to my care. I promised her to watch over him. She died, and not long after, that boy, in a fit of recklessness, left his home to find an opening for himself. He had met a party of mining experts, and before I could guess at his plans, he had accompanied them on one of their expeditions. I was tied for a time by important business, and stayed in our eastern home--sorry, but not over-anxious, but meaning to follow him soon. I need not go into details. It was the old story : evil companions, drink, the gaming-table, a debt of honour, which he paid by giving up his last dollar; and then, too proud to apply to me for help, and made reckless by liquor, he enlisted as a private, and came at once to this frontier post."Well ? " slowly.Well, I heard it in my far-away office, and in my first terrible anxiety and fear for him I tried to buy him his liberty ; but he would not accept that, and so--"" And so"--her voice was milder now--"you enlisted also ; you were graduated at a military school, and before long were made a petty officer. Then there came a fight with the Indians, and you--"" Took some scalps," bitterly." You nearly lost yours, and were promoted for gallantry on the field. I know. And now, Lieutenant Morton ? "" And now ! " he said, almost sternly, " the brother whom I promised to guard, to protect, is in danger ; his happiness, his future is menaced--"" And by what ? "" By a woman !--a coquette with a beautiful face ! By you, Sydney Starr ! "" Oh! " There was a movement as of someone rising impetuously, the sound of something over-

turned. "The beastly Stuff!" It was the girl's voice, and in the moment of silence that followed, Mike made a sudden downward dive, and began to swear under his breath.Following his movement with my eyes, I saw a thin stream of liquid trickling past our feet from the side nearest me, and knew that the bottle of " champagne " had been overturned upon the floor, where it had doubtless been placed by Morton.The silence in No. 10 lasted so long that Mike started and made a movement as if to peer over the edge of our box, but I put a hand upon his arm and he drew back. Then the girl's voice arose, clear and cutting" Mr. Morton, open that door ! Do you think that even here I will permit your insolence ? What is your brother to me ? ""That is not it. Do you know what you are to him ? "" What I am to all of you ! A vaudeville actress, a creature to amuse you in your idle moments, to sing for you, dance for you, and pretend to believe and enjoy your fulsome flatteries ! I am an actress who has captured his fancy for the moment, and whom he will forget next week as easily--as I shall forget him! "" Girl, you know better ! What you say might be true of most of the men who flatter and follow you. What you are is not in his mind. To him you are the woman he loves with the first love of a young man whose life has been clean and pure and jealously guarded, who has known, hitherto, only the society of good women. You laugh, of course. You think it is a boy's love, but the boy has a manly heart, and it is all at your feet. It is in your power to wreck him and--""Stop! In Heaven's name, man, what is it that you are leading up to ? Why are you telling me all this, and in such a way ? Do you want me to encourage him? Are you asking me to accept your brother's address, granting, if you like, that he is serious ?"" To accept ! Good heavens, woman, do you think --would you dare accept and marry any man? "" Do you mean because of what I am--a vaudeville performer ? "" I mean because of who you are!" Ah ! " The cry was low and strangled, and there was the sound as of someone falling, half staggering into a seat. Then the man's voice went on, lower now, so low that Mike had to tiptoe behind me and lean against the boards between us and the speakers; and there was a note of appeal at times in his words, harsh as they were." I do not wish to threaten, nor to alarm you, but I know you ! I have known you from the first. I have not told him. I do not wish to betray you, though it would be the best, the quickest way to end his infatuation."" Ah ! A moment ago it was love." "And it is love; but if Hubert knew--" Knew what?"That you are in hiding! That you are very much wanted by a certain chief of police in Paris and by others--that there is a reward standing, a large reward, for even the merest bit of information regarding you ! ""And you ! Do you not intend to earn this reward? How magnanimous! At least you might tell him. It might serve to console him. Oh, for mercy's sake, man, why did you not tell him the wretched story,

and so end your own anxiety and his--did you call it danger ? ""Tell him ! Woman, what are you made of? Tell that boy, who has not yet lost his faith in woman, his reverence for womanhood ! Tell him of your crime ?" Listen ! I asked you here to implore you to cease this friendship with my brother. I did not intend to threaten nor to let you know that I knew you. I do not know the whole story, nor what great wrongs led you to so horrible a deed. I am not your enemy. In spite of what I know, I could even be your friend at need."" Oh, this is too much!" Wait ! Let us end this. Do you promise to break with Hubert ? "" No!" The answer made even Mike start, so sharp and full of decision it came from her lips. " You refuse ? "" Yes. Tell him what you will."" I will tell him nothing. I will telegraph to the chief of police that he can find you here."" Here ! Ah-h-h ! Find me here!" There was sudden fright in her tones. "No ! no! I--I did not think, nor realise that--that-- Oh, what am I trying to say ! Listen, your brother is the one man in this wretched place whom I could call my friend, with whom I dared talk freely, openly, safely. The one man who treats me as if I were of the same race as his mother or sister, who speaks to me with courtesy. and looks at me with eyes that one dare meet, Among these bold, rough, hateful people he has behaved as if he were still among the elect of the earth, instead of in the purlieus of Hades! But I will relinquish all claim to his courtesy. I will shun him,

and drive him from me if need be. Only promise me that you will wait until I can go away to Denver, Omaha, Salt Lake--anywhere else. Only don't let them know--now nor ever--that you found me here ! "" You are a strange creature," the lieutenant exclaimed. " If I did not know you for--for what you are, I should not wonder at Hubert."When we left the box it was plain, though he tried to hide it, that Mike was greatly incensed, partly because of the waste of his wine, and partly because he had little love at the best of times for the lieutenant, who drank lightly and never gambled.As we stood outside the door of Box No. i r, I put a hand upon Mike's arm. I had been thinking how best to bridle the man's tongue. For I wished both for her sake and for that of the lieutenant to keep this thing that we had half heard, and did not understand, a secret between us."Mike," I said, in a confidential tone, "it's lucky that it was you and I in that box, for we know how to hold our tongues. If this about Miss Starr became known it would hurt you--for you couldn't keep her here an hour."Mike started and eyed me keenly." So! " he said finally. " Is that your lay? " And he looked very wise." No matter about my lay. I want to know what you mean to do before I leave you. I don't want to go east just yet. I've got interested a bit in that new mining prospect. But if this is going to be blown to the four winds, Miss Starr'll have to go back where they want her, and by the first train, and--I'll have to--"I did not mean to finish, and I did not have to. Alike broke in hastily. Even his dislike for the two Mortons and his eagerness to let Miss Starr know that he knew, gave way before his visions of empty chairs and full bottles."Oh, don't give yourself away any further," he said, with an imitation of joviality. " I've suspected you from the first; and I won't make your work any harder. Take yer time, and the freedom of Mike's end of the city's yours from this out."I left Mike and went back to my hotel to think and, incidentally, to look in on MacIntyre.A thought that had already been more than half suggested to my mind, born of watching and studying the Mortons and Miss Starr, I found growing into a belief, after I had heard and weighed, as the unseen and unseeing listener best can, the tones as well as the words uttered by the two in Box No. 10.That Sydney Starr cared for young Hubert Morton I had never believed. But to-night I could not have said the same of Philip Morton. He was a man to capture the heart of any woman, the other was a handsome boy. I decided to watch the two, and to learn more about Sydney Starr.CHAPTER XII
AT THE RACE-COURSEMIKE seemed to take quite a liking to me. Whether he divined the nature of my business and wished to be friends with me, I couldn't tell, but it almost looked that way. When Miss Starr had accepted to appear at the race-course mounted, the whole town became excited, and Mike invited me to go out there with him.He had a fine turn-out, and himself was glorious in a loud check and a gorgeous purple tie.Arriving at the grounds, we had no difficulty in discovering our prima donna." By Caesar's ghosts !' cried Mike, " that girl beats the very deuce! I b'lieve she's going to race ! That's Lieutenant Morton's big bay mare, and she'll ride it. After all their talk of last night ! Ge-whilli-kins ! " Ile reined his horse off the track so suddenly as to send a chattering group of girls squealing in various directions, and in another moment his hat was off, and he was smiling and calling to half a dozen of the group, who at once gathered about his cart, and seemed all eagerness to catch his words and bask in his smiles."And who," asked Mike presently of one of his artistes, "are the riders? I see there are to be ladies."Oh, are there? Hear him! The two Harkness

girls, with their patchwork ponies, an' Kit Smilts, and --say, have you seen her highness, Miss Starr ? It's my opinion she'll take a tumble off that ugly big bay she thinks she's going to ride! ""She may take more than one drop," said a fat girl comfortably. " They had a great jaw before she could be got to mount the brute."" How's that ? " Mike cut in sharply." Seems as if there had been some sort of plan. She had made some arrangement with that young Morton, and when he came to her and told her the horse was there, and in fine form, she up an' declared the deal off. Then he got mad."" Oh, he did ! " Mike was frowning. "The young cub! "" That's it! Ain't he ? Well, they had it to and fro. Seemed as if she was try in' to stir up his injun."" Ah--um ! " Mike nudged my elbow. It was the first time he had, by word or sign, given any hint that he so much as remembered the overheard conversation in Box No. 10." She told him politely that she had thought better of it, and wouldn't ride the bay ; said that she'd accept no favours from Lieutenant Morton and the horse, as she understands it was his ; and then she got a bit huffy. The kid declared that his brother was willing, and then, just as if luck was with him, along comes the lieutenant, an' mounted on that little bronk he rides so well. Quick as a wink, the young feller hailed him, and he cantered up." My lady flings her head back then, and says she, before the boy could speak, ` I wish you to know, Lieutenant Morton, that when your brother proffered me a mount on the night before last, he did not name the owner, but spoke of the horse as quite at his own disposal. I had been

challenged to ride, and had thoughtlessly accepted the challenge.' But she would explain. Nothing would prevail upon her to ride that horse, and he would oblige her by sending a man to take it back to camp." 'I am relieved to hear you speak so,' says he.My horse Fleet is hard on the bit, and rather flighty ; she's not a lady's horse, in any sense of the word. I am amazed that my brother should wish you to mount her, and you do it at a risk ! But, having heard what she is, if you still choose to ride her, she is entirely at your service--entirely so."'" Jove ! " exclaimed Mike, " the brute wants to get her killed."" Perhaps not," I suggested. "It may be, you know," and here I favoured Mike with a meaning glance, " that the lieutenant has faith in her skill and nerve."" Her nerve ! Um--m ! " Mike returned my look in kind, and for a moment was apparently occupied with his own thoughts.It was the nearest we could come to an exchange of sentiments concerning the overheard interview of the previous night, and I saw plainly that Mike was now in the mood for discussion. But I had no mind to discuss the affair just then, and feigning to misunderstand his sign language, I looked out across the field, and then suddenly sprang over the wheel, and with a glib adieu to the young woman, and the remark that I meant to run over to the track to get some pointers on the horses, and would see them later, accompanied by a wink for Mike's benefit, I went rapidly trackward, and was soon burrowing about among the people now gathering close at the ring-side, which had been roped off for about a third of its circumference.I had availed myself of the first chance, open to all good customers at Mike's, to meet Sydney Starr, and I soon made my way to the spot where she was standing, with Hubert Morton still in close attendance. She greeted me graciously, holding out her hand and smiling up into my face ; and I saw a frown darken the countenance of the young soldier as, in greeting me, she advanced a step or two from her place at his side. Turning, she chatted on, bestowing, as I soon observed, two words to the rest of us, to one, and that a brief one, flung across her shoulder to him.And then, in a few moments, Lieutenant Morton approached us, a soldier leading his two fine horses close behind him."Miss Starr," he said, doffing his cap to her, "Barnes tells me that Fleet is in an ugly humour to-day. This being the case, I have thought it best to offer myself as your escort. I can control the animal, if near her, when no one else can. And the two horses are very good companions." He held her eyes with his own while speaking, and the message of the eyes was more urgent than that of the lips. I had looked to hear her refuse his offer straightway, for I caught for just an instant a fiery gleam from her deep eyes from which all semblance of a smile had faded ; but it was only for an instant, then" How good of you, lieutenant. ' I am honoured, I assure you--first, in being trusted to ride your splendid horse, and most by the proffer of yourself as escort. Sergeant," turning quickly toward Hubert, "this releases you from all feeling of responsibility, should Fleet and I come to grief by some mischance; and you can witness my triumph--or defeat--and speed me on with your applause."The young fellow drew back, and without a glance toward his brother he turned away ; but not before she had noted the quiver of his lips and the clinching of his hands, that hung so straight at his side.For a moment her eyes followed him, and as she gazed after him her face softened, and she made just the briefest movement as if to follow ; then the proud lips set themselves in haughty lines once more, and she turned a cold look toward the elder Morton." I have left my gloves in the dressing tent," she said ; " you will find me there presently. Until then--gentlemen, adieu! " and she walked away without a glance toward the spot, not three feet distant, where Mike had just reined up his colt, alone and jaunty, his hat recklessly aside, his wide mouth and foxy eyes attempting a smile--better described as a leer--for her benefit.As she passed him, unheeding, the mouth framed what I knew to be an oath ; and meeting the eye of the lieutenant, I turned with him in the direction opposite to that taken by Miss Starr, and we walked away together. CHAPTER XIII
THE END OF THE RACEI HAD seen but little of the elder Morton, but his reputation as a soldier was already made, and his face, had he been quite unknown to me, would have won my approval ; not so handsome as was that of his young brother, but strong, and fine and frank ; the face that a man possessing a little knowledge of human nature would at once believe in and trust.As I bit off the end of the cigar he had given me, I came to a sudden resolve, and acted upon it as promptly.Slipping my hand through his arm as we drew a little away from the crowd, I said : " Morton, I'm glad of this opportunity to give you a word of information--I had almost said warning! " and I plunged at once into the story of my presence in the box at Mike's. " I cannot now explain," I concluded, "why I did not at once leave the box, or give you warning of our presence. I was there for a purpose--I felt it my duty to remain--even as an eavesdropper. I am sure that you will believe, however, that I did not enter the box to spy upon you."" Nor upon her ? "The question amazed me." Certainly riot ! " I stopped at the last word, puzzled and wondering, for he was looking at me as if I had surprised him. " Do you not understand ? "I resumed, as his gaze still scrutinised my face. " I did not know you were in that box, either of you, when I entered the one adjoining it.""Then what--" He checked himself. " Pardon me. I have no right to question your motives, but do you mean--am I to understand, then, that you are not in pursuit of that young woman ? "In pursuit of her ! "And you are not here to arrest her ? "Arrest her ! Man, what game of cross-purposes are we playing? and for what, or whom, do you take me?"We had been walking away from the crowd, and now we stood upon a bit of open space, quite by ourselves, and face to face.For the first time since we began our talk the lieutenant smiled, and from an inner pocket drew forth a letter, which I could see bore the N.Y. postmark." I know who you are," he said, " and what you are, and lest we get deeper into our game of cross question and crooked answer, will you kindly read this? It is from Horace B. Race, of Race & Barnet. I see you know the firm ? "I nodded, and took the open letter he held out to me. This is what I read" MY DEAR PHILIP,--I have just time to say a few words and catch the mail, and I write to give you a hint of something pleasant that may come in your way. You have heard me speak of Masters, who has been so successful in the secret service bureau ? Well, I have just learned that he is coming to Cheyenne, among other places, on the business of the U. P. people. I think you will like to meet him, and as I expect to see him before he goes, I will give him

your street and number (?), and ask him to look you up. Ile will no doubt be in your city for some time.- Yours hastily,	" H. B. RACE."" So," I said, as I handed back the letter with a grin at my own expense, "you did know me, it seems. I begin to understand a little."" So do I--a little."It was like this : Horace expected to meet me at a banquet of the old club the evening of the 3rd. But my plans were suddenly upset. So I missed seeing Race, and of course knew nothing of his kind and thoughtful intentions in my behalf, I left no address behind me, so he could not write me. And now, to further clear the atmosphere, may I know why I might, but for ignorance, arrest Miss Sydney Starr ? "Morton opened his lips and then closed them firmly, and with a shake of the head." No! " he said. " Excuse me, Masters, for reasons which you must understand, I'd be glad to see the girl started east or farther west to-night, but I can't hound down a woman, even though the law has its claims upon her. She's a dangerous woman, I know that only too well; and if you were not what you are, I would tell you as much of her strange story as I know. That the law wants her you have already heard me say, but the law must find her as it best can, and without my help. And I am glad, as matters have turned out, that your business here is not in any way connected with Sydney Starr."" Whom, of course, you know by another name ? "He shook his head. "At least," he said, " I know her by another appellation, but it is palpably as much a pseudonym as the one she is bearing now."" Do you mean--"Stop! I will tell you all that I ought to tell. I do not know her except as you and all of Mike's patrons do. I never spoke with her until we met in Mike's `parlour.' But three years ago she was pointed out to me as she passed me on horseback. And I was told her name. It was one I had heard before. I did not see her again, but soon after her name went ringing across two continents, and she--had disappeared."" A crime? " I suggested doubtfully."A crime--yes. A hateful crime! There, Masters, that is my last word about Sydney Starr ! And--I have your promise? "" You have my promise." We stood in silence for a moment, and then the tall figure of Hubert Morton strode past us alone, and with unseeing, stormy eyes. As my eyes followed him, I involuntarily exclaimedHow hard this is for you, Morton!""And for him. I pity the boy. We talk of calf love, and sneer, some of us, at a first passion, but Hube loves that handsome creature, and he is growing to hate me for my interference."" Have you told him? "" No! And it would not mend matters." He looked at his watch and turned quickly. " I must get the horses. Excuse me, Masters," and then, with his foot pointed for the first step away from me, he turned, met my eyes squarely, and put out his hand.I put my own within it, and without a word we separated.As I look back to that afternoon, the clear vision of those two riders comes before me again, she sitting his big strong bay as if her home had always been upon the splendid creature's back, and the lieutenant close beside her, erect and soldierly.Like all fine cavalrymen, he looked his best in the saddle, and while his horse was not so tall as the bay, his superior height brought him still a little above her, so that his head overtopped hers, and thus lessened what would otherwise have been a disadvantage--at least in appearance. One other thing I noted, as they made their first dash around the oblong track.I had seen Sydney Starr's face when it was grave and when it was gay ; when the lips were smiling and when the eyes gleamed with a haughty and forbidding lustre. And I had seen fleeting glimpses of indifference and weariness, but these varied glimpses had been so many masks, all of them, I was sure of it.She was a superb horsewoman, riding a splendid animal, conscious of her mastery of it, exulting in it, and oblivious of all else.Not so her companion. He rode with set lips and narrowed eyelids, and while his hands guided his steed with consummate skill, his eyes were turned for the most part in half-veiled, sidelong glances that took in not only her superb riding but every quiver of the bay mare's nostrils, every movement of her ears, and every toss of the shapely head, that was always followed by a sudden tug at the bit."She's been thar afore ! " declared a bow-legged cow-puncher, " cirkis ridin', I'll bet high!"" Yes, siree ! Our prairie gals ain't in it with her!"" Nop, an' I don't reckon she's the least mite scared of that man, neither ! "" She's a daisy on a hoss ! but darn me if I like them sort of gals for every day! Too high an' mighty. Year how she tripped up Turkey Jim las' week?""Naw!"" Waal, sir, she was sashayin' erlong down Mike's parlour and she meets Jim. He's feelin' purty good,

an' she smiles and says 'Evenin',' sort of soshabil. So Jim stops her, and ups and jest kin' o' chucks her under the chin, never sayin' a word, and that gal jest drawn herself up an' looks at him, an' says, `You dare! Clown! ' jest like that, an' turns her back on him. Didn't budge, mind yez, 's if she's 'fraid on 'im ! Jest stood there, an' in a minit that young Morton's thar aside of her lookin' ez if he's goin' ter hit out at Jim. Jim'd got a few steps off by that time, tho', an' missy jest steps in a'tween 'em, wavin' the sojer feller back like she's some queen, and she says, 'Be kind enough not to interfere in my small 'fairs, Surgent Morton! If I warn't able to take keer of myself I shouldn't a come here ! ' ""Huh ! " commented one of the listeners. " It don't sound much as if she didn't know where she was at when she first come to Mike's--hey ! "" Shet up! " snarled an old miner, who had been a silent listener. "She didn't take yer money--ye know that;" then with a sudden forward start he cried, " My Lord--look at that ! "I turned quickly, and that glance showed me the bay mare running madly, and with head down, and Philip Morton pressing close upon the mare's flanks, with his left hand outstretched in a vain attempt to grasp--what ?As they came into sight around the curves, with Sydney Starr on the side toward us, I saw, with horror, a loosely flying rein, or the shorter part of one ; and a murmur of horror went up as it became evident that the girl was sitting holding fast to one end of the bridle, while the other was flying loosely just out of reach of Morton's hand.In a moment--as it seemed--the track was cleared, and the bay mare and the little grey were

flying around the circuit--the man now a half length ahead.And then,as the track became clear of the many, two men, who held their places and sought yet closer ones, became also objects of breathless interest and wonder." What is he trying to do ?"" Look at Pony Jack ! "" He got a lariat, and--"" Great snakes ! Stop that feller, somebody He'll be killed, sure!"And it looked like it.Pony Jack was crossing the track with a lariat in his hand. He took up a position upon the inner side of the circle, and in a moment the coil was ready, and he was watching with keen eyes the approach of the bay mare, which was still circling the track--kept there, no doubt, as much by his discipline and familiarity with its curves as by her master's pressure on her off-side, and possibly also by the presence of the single rein in the hands of the rider.But it was not Pony Jack's posture and his dangerous purpose that blanched the cheeks of the women, and drew amazed exclamations from the men.It was Hubert Morton who, having flung off his coat and hat, had taken his stand in the middle of the track at the point, almost opposite Pony Jack, where the track made its shortest curve at the south end of the oblong.And now a man's voice, loud and clear, rang out as the two horses came down the west side of the long stretch: " Morton, for God's sake, don't shoot ! "Many eyes were fixed upon the younger Morton, standing now, his body well forward like a runner about to start, but there was no weapon in his clinched hands.The next moment I caught a glimpse of Philip Morton's face, pallid and resolute, and of his right hand, which held across his horse's neck a glittering pistol ; and thenI saw the girl's head turn ever so little, and her lips formed the words : "Don't! Keep back!" I saw him give the grey a savage thrust of the spur; saw her bound forward and closer to her running mate ; saw the lariat whirled in the air and flying toward them ; saw Hubert Morton bound forward, and heard the crack of the pistol.What the next moment revealed to our startled eyes was the lariat settling down, not over the horse's head, but over the rider's, who at the same time swung herself suddenly to one side, and gave a tug at the single rein.And then we were rushing across the rope and upon the track, where lay the big bay mare struggling upon the ground and dangerously near young Morton, who went down clasping the form of Sydney Starr. They were lying, both of them, silent and deathly pale. The lariat that had dropped from Pony Jack's hand was looped about her body, and its length trailed loosely across the track to the spot where Pony Jack stood, limply leaning against a post, with flushed face and blazing eyes.For a few thrilling seconds it had seemed as if the grey horse and its rider would be added to the overthrow, for the creature, held back by a too sudden and strong jerk, as the ball sped and the mare wheeled and fell, stood pawing the air, first over the struggling horse and the still figures so near it. Then the strong hands upon the bit were relaxed, as Philip Morton, the first shock of horror having passed, slid from the saddle, letting the pistol fall in the dust,

quieted the horse with a word, and knelt beside the two figures that had already been drawn a few feet away from the prostrate mare.Hubert Morton lay upon his back, both stalwart arms clasped about the body of Sydney Starr, her face close to his own.As Philip Morton's hand touched his brother's wrist, the big dark eyes, so close to his own, opened slowly and looked up wonderingly. At the same moment the lieutenant spoke. " He is alive--yet ! " he says ; and at the word a shuddering sigh flutters the girl's lips, and her eyes close.
CHAPTER XIV
WHO DID IT?
MIKE was in a peculiar state of mind that night. He had been discussing the events of the afternoon, as they would, or might, affect him or his interest ; and with the stage manager he was as frank and as much the natural man " as he was ever likely to be with any human being, for " Billy" Dill had been with him since the opening of the theatre, and being to Mike, though to no one else, a valuable man, he was favoured with the nearest approach to friendliness that Mike was capable of, and escaped for the most part the harsh rebuffs and outbursts of rage to which the hirelings at Mike's soon grew accustomed.Even our great men have their weaknesses, and Mike's was an abnormal sense of his own importance. No matter how fully his labour might come up to the value set upon it by Mike, there must still be paid to the little, fussy, ferret-eyed, exacting manager of the new theatre a meed of gratitude, of cringing respect and deference, or the actor, be it man or woman, must be prepared for squalls, and able to ward off petty persecutions, while expecting none of the little favours and helps that, in such a place, would go far toward making one's position at least bearable.And Sydney Starr had now gone deep in Mike's black book.But her overwhelming success had checked his

anger, and in a measure mollified him ; for now that she was proving a strong drawing card, he could not afford to lose her, and must not make her position too hard. So he had let his anger cool, while his pockets filled, and then had come another flagrant bit of rebellion. His " people," one and all, were herded at the boarding-house kept by his wife, who overtopped them by inches, outweighted them by pounds, and was a termagant and a slattern.When Mike was told that Sydney Starr had left the house one morning long before he was awake, and had established herself in Roxy Higgins' new house, his wrath blazed, and he swore she must come back, but his valuable stage manager had shown him his folly." Mike, you can't afford it. She's got these fellers by their noses. If you try that on them, they'll just break out and turn the town loose on you. She can own this town, and it's lucky for us that she don't know it." And Mike knew that he was right.And then had come the day of the races, and Sydney's wild ride. Now, it might be supposed that such an adventure would be hailed by the sensation-hungry manager as an opportunity for exploiting his star ; but Mike and some others knew that there was danger in giving his " people " any manner of prominence outside the theatre, for even then, when the town was at its wildest and worst, there was an element that did not patronise the theatre, at least the lighter attractions.Upon these the ordinary charms of Mike's galaxy of beauty had no power or influence. But Sydney Starr was a new thing under the sun of that mountain-guarded western hot-bed of grasping vice, and th thing Mike feared came quickly to pass.Her face, when she rode out upon the track: withLieutenant Morton, drew the eyes of those to whom as yet she was merely a name. Her seat in the saddle won the first murmur of admiration, and that wild ride completed the conquest, and proffers of aid were many; and when she left the place, half the vehicles upon the ground, and all of the men, were hers to command.When the curtain went up that evening, there were faces in the audience that were seldom seen under that roof, save when play ran high, and almost never in the auditorium, and they were frankly on the look-out for Sydney Starr.They lined up at the bar, and received Mike's effusive greetings with an open indifference that was as wormwood to him." If you can keep up this sort of thing," they said to him, " you'll see us here often. But, of course, you won't be likely to keep an attraction like her. Must have been a big tornado that blew that sort from God's country to this, eh ?" and without waiting for a reply, they passed from the bar to the auditorium.When the last man had filed through the door, Mike struck the glass, still gripped in his hand, a blow upon the wood, that meant fragments of green glass all about the enclosure. " Damn him! " he exclaimed, between his teeth ; " and damn her ! ""Look out!" murmured Dill. "It won't do to kick against that crowd, and "--here he brought his face close to the other's ear--" you want to go easy, Mike. If the Starr gets into any sort of trouble here, she'll have the whole boiling at her back ; and you don't want another bonfire !--not yet ? "And as I lounged away from the corner of the little enclosure, where I had been smoking, with the air of being bored, Dill favoured me with a knowing wink."If that chap and Mike knock up against each other," he whispered sagely, "there'll be `teeth and claws drawn' and fur a-flyin' ! You hear me? "I nodded, for I quite agreed with him, and entered the auditorium.Sydney Starr, always received with much applause, had on this night a genuine ovation. She was not in her best form, for the strain of her battle with the maddened horse had been severe.Something of the rigidity of Mike's "rules" governing " dress and deportment " had been abated in her favour to-night, and the one concession she made to her own personal need and comfort was in the form of a wrap, long and loose, with a scarf-like cape crossing her shoulders. It was fleecy, soft and warm, and had been donned at the command of Roxy Higgins in the face of Mike's decree, as little to be disregarded as that of Queen Victoria; and Mike's ladies, like those of the Queen's Drawing-room, must appear always dcollette.They came into the balcony, preceded by one of the waiters, who had been sent to summon her to the "parlour," where the group of sporting dignataries waited to be presented and to enroll themselves among her votaries. And to Mike, who witnessed their exchange of courtesies from the opposite side of the balcony, the interview looked very tame." Looks like a lot of Sunday school teachers planning a Fourth of July picnic, and worrying about the funds for the ice-cream ! " grumbled Mike. " Why, what in--"He stopped, breathless with amazement. Lieutenant Morton had come forward, and as the signal for the next number was about to be given, whispered something in the leader's ear, which caused him to

turn half round and look up toward the balcony, where Mike, looking also, saw " the judge " standing close to the balcony rail where it adjoined the stage, so that he could look down upon nearly all below him.Standing thus and leaning outward, the judge called in loud, clear tones" Gentlemen, your attention, please ! " As he lifted his hand there was a quiet movement, a craning of necks and scraping of chairs, and then a silence, upon which the judge's voice broke, strong and stern." Gentlemen, many of you were witnesses of what might have been a tragedy upon the race-track to-day. What was meant to be a tragedy ! Gentlemen, you saw Miss Starr's splendid riding; you saw her superb management of a terrified horse, and the three-fold danger from which she escaped, as by a miracle ! How many of you saw the parting of the bridle-rein that put her at the mad animal's mercy? But did anyone hear the snapping of that bridle of leather, parting as under a strain, or see it ? " He paused a moment, dramatically waiting with hand upraised. "No? And let me tell you why ! The bridle, by which a frail woman was permitted to guide that unsafe beast,had been cut through to the thinness of silk! It was a murder we were to have witnessed instead of a race!" And then swiftly, before the shock of his words had unsealed their lips, he thundered forth" Gentlemen, in the name of the Driving Park Committee, and as its head, I offer one thousand dollars for any information that will lead to the apprehension of the guilty wretch who did this deed."Again the outbreak of the now excited crowd was checked for the moment, for Lieutenant Morton had jumped upon the vacant chair, and his voice rang out"And I offer five thousand! "CHAPTER XV
MIKE'S WATERLOOBEFORE the aroused and excited men had begun their movement toward the outer room, there to hold further counsel--to exclaim, disdain, suspect, denounce, and plan--the judge's voice was heard again above the now fast-increasing uproar." Gentlemen, don't break up the show ! We don't want a mob, but to-morrow, at noon, let all who have a word, or a dollar, or the time, or all together, meet with me at--" He paused for a moment, and Mike broke in:" Here--at Mike's ! "" At my quarters ! Much obliged, Mike, but your place is too public. I have lately taken rooms at the Roxy Higgins' apartment house, and there's room for a good many large men--with big hearts ! We want no others there."He bowed to the crowd below, and the " show " moved on.I was keeping a pretty close eye upon my friends MacIntyre and the Deacon that day, and had seen the pair upon the race ground, where the former kept his place in the runabout in which they had driven out together. Mac' had a crutch in evidence, across or between his knees, much to the annoyance of the Deacon, who, I thought, looked glum, and seemed to take little interest in the betting.Once I thought I saw a glimpse of him with a

woman beside him, but they were driving townward, and had almost reached the exit; and it was only a moment before the big mare broke away from her escort and snapped her bridle-rein, and after that I never thought again of the Deacon, nor asked myself where lie could have bestowed his crippled comrade, while he of all men played the gallant.It was the crutch that aroused my suspicions, and caused me to think that Mac's lameness was not so serious as it was made to appear ; and when the pair turned up at Mike's early and repeatedly, I set myself to do double watch.In the meantime, young Hubert Morton, who had made an early beginning, had been so wrought upon by the revelation of the judge that he had at once repaired to the bar for a bracer, and then had made the round of the place in a fruitless search for Sydney Starr, who had found it an easy task, in that labyrinth, to avoid him, and who did so with a frank indifference that must have gratified the lieutenant, had he been there to see.As for Sydney herself, she seemed in a somewhat singular mood that night; her words were few and her manner listless and indifferent.As the night grew long, her face, pale at first, became pallid; and at last she broke away from a party of would-be entertainers, and declared her desire for a brief rest." I suppose I must admit it," she said; " I am weary ! If you will kindly excuse me, and will not follow me, I will find a corner somewhere, and a seat, and sit still and close my eyes for a few moments. Don't let anyone follow me, please ! " And this was enough. She turned and went, not toward the dressing-rooms--for in order to reach there she must traverse two sides of the balcony, pass numerous boxes, and cross

the "parlour "--but in the opposite direction where, around a curve, in a nook cut off by the outer stairway, were three boxes, the lowest of all, and the least desirable, only used, in fact, upon big nights, when all the others were filled. Here she might find a moment's seclusion, she thought; and then, having turned the corner, she started back."'Sh-h-h ! 'sh ! Oh, Miss Starr ! Is it you? Do help us ! ""What is it?" But she knew as she asked the question. It was Hubert Morton, ashen pale, limp and sodden with drink, half sitting, half reclining, upon the floor in the doorway of the second box. His head had fallen upon his chest; his fingers, which had been clinging to the door-post were weakly relaxing their clutch, and his eyes were closed. He was passing from the maudlin stage to the stupor that is more like death than sleep." Oh, Miss Syd !" It was rollicking, good-hearted Norah McAllister, the singer of Irish ballads. " Can't ye help us out, darlin' ? See the poor boy ! He's been huntin' ye up an' down all the night long, and when we got him sort of run in here, we thought, by bein' careful, and keepin' a watch out, we could coax him to rest a bit here in the box, an' then we'd try to get him down these outside stairs without Mike's spyin' us; for if he finds him like this--Lord ! what won't he do ? Can't you help us, honey? "" It's too late, girls," she said pityingly ; " you'll have to leave him here until he sleeps off the worst of this, and I'll see if I can't find one of his friends. His brother, I fear, is not here.""No, worse luck ! But we must get him inside, and he'll just have to lie on the floor." With much tugging and straining, they dragged the

limp figure within, and as Sydney looked about her she shuddered, and suddenly took off her long plaid cloak." Here, girls, and lay him back upon this; it will fold about him, and the long cape will make a sort of pillow. Oh ! there, there ; never mind me! And you must keep watch, girls. Norah, it's soon your turn on the stage. Go ! I'll try and find help."But even her friends seemed to baulk her plans. As she paused to look over the rail, searching the floor below for a face she might venture to trust, Judge Hobbs approached her." Miss Sydney, let me bid you good-night, or rather, good morning; I am about to go. But first let me ask: Have you any idea as to the person who--why, bless me," as she turned her face toward him, "Miss Starr, you look positively ill! You must go home at once.""No; oh, no ! I--""Tut, tut! I know all about Mike's rules, and I know Mike. I shall go to him, and--ah, there he is now ! I'll just call him up.""No, not yet. I want to speak to you, judge. You asked me--" She paused. How could she delay him, divert him, and keep Mike from coming any nearer i Suppose young Morton should waken--should become noisy! Yes, she would tell him. It might as well be told."Judge," she began again, "you ask if I suspect anyone. I do not. But I knew that the bridle was cut; I discovered it just a moment before the mare made that first fearful bolt. I think it was at a scrap of wind-blown paper." She stopped and gasped for breath, while the judge listened, darting sharp glances below now and then.Mike had appeared at the balcony rail just across from them, and at right angles, and she had seen the

judge give him a signal, which she knew he would not be slow to obey." He shall let you off ! " he said." Yes, and fine me to-morrow."" Not he ; I'll see to that. What is the man stopping for? I'll go to him.""Thank you ! And I'll wait here. I'll run now and get my wrap. Please wait for me--here.""Very good." He moved away in the direction opposite to that of the three boxes, and Sydney flew to give the alarm." Girls," speaking at the keyhole, "open! You must get me my cloak, or at least the cape," and then, as the door opened a little way, and she saw the wine-room girl, Rosa, sitting alone with the sleeping figure at her feet, she wrung her hands." I hate to take it," she said woefully ; "but I can't go out without something, and there's no way of getting a wrap. Only the cape, Rosa ! I won't have the long cloak. The poor boy needs it; and you'll take care of it for me, won't you ? ""Sure thing ! " responded Rosa, and then she uttered a little screech, as a hand fell upon her shoulder ; and looking up, she beheld the face of Mike, black with rage, close to her own." What is this ? Miss Starr, is this little scene your idea--"" Stop, sir ! " she exclaimed. " I will answer your questions. I will not hear your impertinences. This," pointing to the prostrate man huddled in the corner of the tiny space, " was a man, and has been made a beast by your vile liquor. Let me pass, Mr. Aiken ! "But he did not stir from his place in the narrow doorway."Not yet, young lady. I want to know whose

work this is ? Is it yours, or--" He paused to glare at Rosa, who began to whimper." It is yours, I repeat. Hush, Rosa ! you are not this man's slave."" Don't be too sure, young lady. She's under my thumb too thoroughly to dare disobey my orders, and so are you. With all your fine lady airs, you've got the devil in you, and you need a lesson. You'll get it, too, if this business continues. You can't come into my place and begin to run matters, and you will find yourself in trouble if you--"" If I do," she stepped forward and close before him, letting her hand slip from the arm of the crouching and weeping girl, "it will be for killing you, Mike Aiken ! And as sure as you repeat your impertinences, or venture to address me in this manner again, I'll shoot you down like a dog ! It will be a fine act to walk out upon your stage, and finish my turn by sending a bullet into that brutal head of yours. You are right, I've got a devil in me, and sometimes he clamours so to see your blood and brains--I suppose beasts have brains--that it's hard to refrain ! It's hard to refrain now ! Stand out of my way ! do you hear ? "There was a moment of hesitation, and then a tiny pistol flashed under his nose, and the man stumbled back in haste." Come, Rosa ! " she said ; " I am going to send an officer to look after this poor fellow."But Mike was not altogether cowed,not all a coward ; and as she moved away, he sprang past her, shouting to the first waiter he saw at the head of the gallery" Carrie ! send John and Black Tom here, quick ! Do you hear ? quick ! "Sydney caught Rosa by the arm. '(Stop!" she

exclaimed, " I must see--" but the girl shook off her hand." Oh, I can't ! I daren't ! " she cried. " I'd lose my berth, and then what could I do in this horrible place?" and she fled down the passage and out upon the gallery, panting and wretched.But Sydney Starr placed her back against the wall and waited ; but not long. Black Tom was washing beer-glasses at the upper bar, and he came instantly, and John was not far behind. They were Mike's creatures ; and when she saw the door leading upon the balcony over the street flung open, she started, and clutched her pistol in a tight, steady grip.But it was only her cloak that the burly negro brought out and flung over the rail, out into the night; and then Hubert Morton, half-dragged, half-carried,was brought forth, and brutally thrust down the outside stairway and over the rail into the street, still helpless.Sydney's eyes blazed when she heard Mike sayBoys, mind you keep this business mum. It won't do to let it get around to some of the boys. The ---- fool knew 'twas against the rules to be lolling drunk in my boxes and parlours." Sydney walked back to the place where the judge still waited, with firm step and set lips." Ah, here you are ! " he exclaimed, as she joined him. " Miss Starr, you can go home at once. Mike was graciously willing."Sydney laughed mockingly. " Thank you for the trouble you have taken, judge; but I must stay until the curtain falls, and I wish you would." Then suddenly her tone changed and softened. " Don't think me ungrateful," she said, her voice faltering just a little. " You will understand why I wish to remain--tired though I surely am--soon."Judge Hobbs looked down at her and pondered. "Miss Starr," he said gravely, " can I serve you by remaining ?She flushed."If--if you will be kind enough--I--should like to have you in the corner room, near the bar, after the bell strikes. I--that is all ! " and she smiled ruefully, and presently turned and left him.A few steps beyond she met Pony Jack, who at once paused and held out his hand." Won't ye jest say 'How-d'y' ter me, Miss Sydney?" he asked, in a half-jesting tone. " Ye ain't treatin' me friendly, some way."Sydney looked him straight in the face. " Ought I to be your friend, Mister Jack ? "" You bet ! If I've got the say so.""Your actions are not those of a friend--sometimes," she said, her eyes still searching his face." It didn't come from whar I live, then, Miss Syd.I'd rather be yer friend than--"" Hush, Jack ! here comes a crowd from the wineroom. Jack, be near the bar when the theatre closes. The one downstairs, I mean. 'Sh ! don't speak. I must go down," and she flitted away.Mike's bar was apt to be surrounded for a short time after the last curtain fell, for the night was far spent, and a thirst that could not brook delay often oppressed his patrons. But on this particular night there seemed more than the usual thirst, more than the usual desire for a social last word, and a reluctance about setting out into the dim early morning." Seem to find it hard to tear themselves away this A.M., don't they ? " said the bar-keeper, in an aside to Mike, who was always his support at the closing hour." They don't seem to need much liquid consolation --'cording to the size of the gang--as I can see," Mike grumbled back. And just then Sydney Starr, bareheaded and without wrap of any sort, came down the long room and straight toward the bar." Mr. Aiken," she said, with freezing politeness, " I am sorry to trouble you, but I must ask you for my wrap, which I believe you can account for."Mike glared at her blankly. "Your wrap, miss ! What do I know of your wraps? Or care, either! "Sydney's face was immovable, but she answered, slowly and distinctly:"You may not know it, but when you ordered Sergeant Morton to be flung down your outer stairway into the street, my wraps were also flung over the railing. I have already suffered somewhat to-day, and unless my street garments are restored to me I fear that my place here may be vacant to-morrow night."Mike was speechless for the moment. Not only had this girl dared to beard him in his own den, but she had exposed his brutal treatment of a young man who counted almost every man in the place among his friends, thereby hurting him--Mike--how much none could guess, in pocket and in reputation. The reputation of a " good fellow," who stood by his friends, to establish which he had posed and smirked long and faithfully.But this was not all! She had threatened him! For this is what her reference to her own danger of exposure amounted to. With her popularity at its height, he knew that to open his doors with no Sydney Starr to help make the night joyful would be to court disaster. And yet Mike was oblivious, for the time, to all save his rage. Fury was his master.Only for a moment; but in that brief time some singular things had happened.Precisely how they happened, and whether all together, or singly and in quick succession, no one afterwards seemed able to tell.There was a moment of stillness, during which the man's lips worked silently, and his eyes were beastlike in their ferocity. Then Sydney turned away."Understand me, sir," she said. " You have committed an act of wanton barbarity, and have left me exposed to serious discomfort. If I leave this roof without my property, be sure I shall not return until it is restored. And I take the gentlemen here to witness that ` for good and sufficient reasons, and undue great provocation,' I have cancelled my contract with you ! "She turned, but with her first step toward the outer door Mike's silence was broken by a flood of vituperation and profanity. But this was promptly drowned in shouts, cat-calls and hisses; and as Mike, fairly beside himself, caught up a long-necked flask, and was about to hurl it, his arm was thrown up with a most ungentle thrust, and his feet suddenly flew from under him, while a big paw was laid across his mouth with needless force, and kicking, writhing and spluttering, the proprietor of the "Boss" theatre was ignominiously "toted " out of the room, and into the auditorium, now dark and empty.At the upper end of the bar, where it widened to enclose a small and cosy corner, between the bar proper and the stairway that led up to the balcony and the bar above, Mike had arranged a sort of snuggery, where a screen and curtain shut off a too inquisitive gaze, and a couch and some easy-chairs were crowded about a small table opening out of

this was a capacious closet, beneath the stairs, where Mike was wont to bestow top-coats, canes, whips, lariats, or weapons, for their safety and the ease of mind of his friends.Here hung on most nights a handsome fur-lined overcoat, the property of Mike, and here, too, Pony Jack was in the habit of bestowing a handsome Navajoe blanket, which he habitually carried before him across his saddle.The enclosure at the front was railed from the end of the bar to the wall of the stairway, and a gate in it gave the initiated access.At the moment when Mike's voice broke out in the tirade addressed toward Sydney Starr, Pony Jack was standing, as by chance, close beside this railing, while before the bar Jersey Pete, Jim Griggs, and the chums, Tom and Jerry, were grouped ; and the tall figure of the judge was close to Sydney, and but a few steps in the rear of the others, as well as of herself.When Mike's voice lifted itself, high pitched and strident, the men grouped about the room were all silent, as they had been since the first word from the lips of their stage idol had broken in upon their clamour of speech ; and as Mike's meaning became clear to them, there was a silent movement closer together and about the bar." Stop! " The judge was standing at Sydney Starr's side, one hand ominously near his pistol pocket. At the same moment Pony Jack had vaulted lightly over the railing enclosing Mike's " cosy corner," and before Dill or the bar-keeper could lift their hands in restraint or protection, Pony Jack's right hand was at Mike's throat, while his left hand had stopped the big oath dropping from his lips; and then the bar was crowded, the light door torn from its hinges, and Mike was

carried by half-a-dozen strong and willing hands into the theatre, his mouthed gagged with the soiled towel used about the bar.And then, while they stood about her--and now that a lull had fallen, inaction for the moment held them awkwardly awaiting whatever might come next--Sydney spoke:" Gentlemen, all of you, I thank you for your championship of the weak to-night. You have given me courage, by making me feel that here, where not long ago I felt utterly forlorn, I have found friends, and the most valued friends of all--friends in need! Some of you witnessed my first dreary appearance here, on this very spot, and you know the obligation which binds me to the service of this man," nodding toward the place where Mike remained, speechless and inwardly raging, and could hear her every word. " I know that you stand now, as you did at first, ready to release me, and I thank you ! But I shall not ask it of you. I mean to fulfil the engagement I blindly made, and I ask you to do nothing more, and to release the man yonder. If he chooses to ask my pardon for the ruffianly assault he began in words, I shall come back here and do my part. Otherwise--I have you to witness that I had provocation unendurable; and I will thus ask you to stand by me, and help me to leave this horrible place."And now," she resumed, " I will ask you to let me go from here quietly and alone. At least with only one of you, and I can trust you all ; I feel it." She hesitated for a moment, and did not raise her eyes, but the judge, who had again noted that swiftly passing shiver, bent over her." Miss Sydney, as the oldest man here, or so I

believe, I claim the privilege of being your escort. You will not refuse my guardianship ? "" I accept it gratefully," she replied.The next day brought more bitterness to Mike. His bar-keeper and manager, of whose sympathy he had felt sure, openly told him that he had nobody to blame but himself, because he had tried to run against the whole town. Then there came a letter addressed to him and signed by forty names, in which he was warned not to attempt any revenge or insult upon Sydney Starr under the penalty of death. And while he was still staring at this letter, and gnashing his teeth, in stalked Pony Jack, and waved aside the letter, which Mike tried to show him, with the careless words : " I know all about that."Mike was at the end of his rope, and he could do nothing but stare at his favourite customer and chum in open-mouthed wonder." Yes," continued Jack, " we have been friends, but I'm your friend in future only jest accordin' as ye square yerself with Miss Starr. An' ye've got to do it quick, Mike! "Before Mike could find his wits to do more than look and utter a string of sulphurous profanity, Dr. Marsh came in, a ponderous old man, highly respected and honoured by all the different elements that constituted the population of Cheyenne. He was never at Mike's except when called in to repair the injuries done by pistol or knife, and as he entered an expectant silence settled upon the whole room.Dr. Marsh announced to Mike that the excitement of the night before had proved too much for Miss Starr, that she was suffering, and that he had forbidden her to appear on the stage for the present.When the doctor had gone the profound silence still reigned. All knew that Mike felt he was defeated. How would he face this overwhelming Waterloo?Mike's features were a show for several minutes, before he managed to take his teeth apart and acknowledge the obvious facts by a resigned" Well, boys, she's high just now. Have one on me.Sydney Starr had triumphed, but I knew Mike too well to feel easy.CHAPTER XVI
COMPLICATIONSMIKE humbled himself before Miss Starr, and the doing it by proxy was quite as agreeable to the girl as it doubtless was to himself. In fact, it was her voice which finally decided that it should be so done, for the judge and Pony Jack had determined that no form of respect should be omitted from this ceremony." Let him eat his own humble pie," Jack had said surlily. " An apology by card is too effete for this country." And the judge had added" Don't make his ' penance' too easy--eh, Miss Starr ? "But Sydney Starr was of another mind.And so, after all, Mike had to thank Sydney Starr for the relief he experienced when told that a written apology, and the wrap, or its equivalent, would be all that was desired at his hands; and as he was not above maligning himself at need, he wrote:"MISS STARR,--My esteemed young friend, I trust you will believe that it was only when I was not myself that the event of last night could occur. Many things had combined to worry and vex me that day ; your own awful danger upon the track had got upon my nerves, and I regret to say that I had taken too much liquor, and was not master of my tongue and temper when I gave you cause for anger against me." Pray accept my sincere apologies, and believe me, there shall be no further cause for offence, and let me continue, as in the past, a friend who has your welfare and interest at heart.--Yours very sincerely,"J. MICHAEL AIKEN."Something in the wording of this document caused Sydney Starr to utter a little low laugh, and to glance amusedly up at the judge, as she passed the letter over to him for perusal.It forced a short laugh from the judge also. But the laugh was followed by a frown, and the frown lingered.But when the missive came in its turn into Pony Jack's hand, he seemed to see in it no reason for laughter, and only growled, as he laid it upon the table at his elbow:" What rot ! Mike never gets so drunk as not to know what he is about--at least, not in business hours."Sydney Starr made the most of her privileges, and remained that evening in her snug room, with Roxy Higgins visiting her and sending off her would-be callers." For the land's sake ! " cried the good soul, as she met a delegation at the door. " Let the poor child have one evening in peace ! She's grateful to yez all, but she's dead tired an'--ye can't come in, an' that's all there is to ut !" And Roxy's round, jolly laugh would soften her belligerent words, and send away the visitors disappointed but amiable.Of course the news soon spread, and, as a consequence, the " show " at Mike's was poorly attended, and went off tamely.And this was well for Mike, for a crowd that night would surely have meant an outbreak, and all hands would have united to turn against him, as Dill explained to him, in his characteristic way, when Mike, who writhed under the thought of the money loss a poor night would mean to him, began to make his moan." Jumpin' Moses, man!" Dill broke out, after listening for a time to a monologue of complaints and maledictions, "don't ye know when you're well off ever? Great Scott ! what do you suppose all these fellers that usually throw you their money so freely are about to-night ? More than half of them's cursin' you, or rakin' you over after some fashion; and you may not be so safe yet. If ye was a reasonable man ye'd close these doors at midnight sharp, and let it go out that 'twas to give the other people a rest, along with Miss Starr."" You're a ---- fool, Dill! " Mike snarled."All right ! I've known that this long time We're mostly all fools that hang on here long! But let me tell ye this fer yer comfort. They didn't do great things at the judge's rooms this mornin'. Guess the judge didn't expect it ; but they filtered the gang mighty close, and to-night they are holdin' another meetin', with closed doors; and every man in the lot has got it in fer you, if the chance pans out. Course their object is to find out who cut that bridle, and some of them suspect--you ! ""Let 'em ; I didn't do it, nor plan it. S'pose I'd kill my own game, and all the rest of it? "" Well, yer actions's what they count. As fer Pony Jack, he's sworn a big oath to find who cut that leather, and settle the account single-handed."" Let him. Jack's getting a bigger fool every day."He's got lot's o' comp'ny ! Then there's Hube Morton--he's got a string o' friends that took my breath away. Of course you know all about 'cm," ironically; "and they're bunched together at the hotel."" What hotel ? " snapped Mike." Lindholm--course! They're lookin' after Morton. He's a sick man, after layin' an hour out there on the cold sand. 'Twill turn out mighty bad luck fer you if Morton gets worse ! They're takin' good care of him, but between the watches they find plenty of time to discuss different ways of doin' you up if the boy goes wrong. I tell ye, Mike, you're a mighty unpopular man bout these days! " and Dill lighted a cigar, and lounged up from Mike's easiest office chair. " Guess I'll go tell them wine-room girls they needn't draw too heavy on the house bar ; 'twon't be necessary, I'll be bound," and he sauntered out, closing the door softly.But outside the room his face wrinkled itself into a grin of delight. " Gee-ee! how hard he takes it! And don't I like to just rub in the agony ? And I didn't draw it much too gory. Mike'll get his recompense yet. Somebody that hates him--a'most as bad as I do--'ll snuff him out some day. I'm a poor cuss, an' my own worst enemy; but I'd rather be poor old Billy Dill than Mike Aiken any day! "Dill had not exaggerated much. The judge, Pony Jack, and half-a-dozen others, selected for their shrewdness and "staying" qualities, had organised for a systematic search for the author of the cowardly attempt to kill Sydney Starr, and I had been honoured by being selected as one of the few select, who, to use Jack's phrase, were " in the ring."It was a blind lead as yet, and while we sat in the

judge's room waiting, Jersey Pete came in. He had just reached town, and his first inquiry was for Hubert Morton.Judge Hobbs motioned him toward me. " Mr. Masters stops at the Lindholm, Pete," he said, " and he has just seen young Morton and his brother."I had but just arrived, and had been upon the point of telling the group the little I knew.Young Morton was feverish, and his pulse was high. This much I had seen, and the doctor had met me at the outer door and told me the rest. " It's a simple question of how much damage the exposure may leave in evidence after the effects of the liquor wears away. The fever, and the wild eye and high pulse, are due to the potations. The boy's condition, too, may prevent any very ill effects. A drunken man, as we all know, will stand with impunity what would make a sober man ill. He ran more risk in that draughty, sultry hole at Mike's than he did outside. But twenty-four hours will tell the story. I hope it will be just a scare, but there's a chance--just a chance--of pneumonia."It was the doctor's advice that the patient should not be moved until the truth about his condition could be learned ; certainly not for a day or two.One point in my innocent discourse was grasped at by Jersey Pete, and dwelt upon, I thought, with unnecessary unction. Two points, in fact, for he combined the good doctor's statements that there was a chance of pneumonia, and that young Morton ran his greatest risk while lying in Mike's draughty "box," and he repeated them with many nods and winks, and much fervour, to one or two of his friends in our little group, and it was evident that they found, for some reason, solid satisfaction in the ideas, strange

as that at first seemed to me. The explanation came later.In the midst of our consultation, Lieutenant Morton joined us. He had left his brother asleep, and the doctor was with him, and he felt that he owed it to the friends of Miss Starr to offer his services as freely as he did his purse in the prosecution of the search for Miss Starr's secret enemy.As he spoke I listened, and it was hardly to be wondered at that I asked myself if these men who were seeking for a clue--if they knew what I knew about that meeting in Box No. I0--Would believe that they had found it ? Was there a man in that place who had a stronger reason for wishing Sydney Starr out of his path than had the brother of Hubert Morton ? And if so, who could he be, and what could be his reason ?And then, looking in the man's face, I turned my back upon the hateful idea. If suspicion must turn in that direction, it would never be my finger that pointed the way. I believed it to be an impossibility. And then, suddenly, I thought of Mike.I had seen my friend MacIntyre seated at Mike's gaming-table at an early hour that evening, and knowing his habits so well, I felt safe to linger with the judge after the rest had gone. I wished to learn something, if possible, about Philip Morton, and I had already learned to look to Judge Hobbs for such items of the town's history, including the history of the citizens, as he felt inclined or at liberty to impart.Luckily, our minds seemed similarly occupied, for no sooner had the last man gone than he threw himself back in a big easy-chair, and stretching out his long arms, said:"Sit down a bit, Masters. I want to let off some

steam. Confound it, it may sound queer, but I feel sorrier this minute for Philip Morton than I do for that soft-headed brother who is at the bottom of all this trouble ! "" All of it ? " I repeated." Yes; or nearly all. Fact is, the fellow feels quite as badly cut up about that accident to Miss Starr at the races as he does at his brother's disgrace, which, after all, does not count for much in this community. Ye see, we're pretty good friends, Phil and I, in spite of the difference in our ages, and he has told me--how it happened." He paused, and after a moment I said" You mean--"" About the horse. He's badly cut up that it should have been his horse that caused the accident." I could not wonder at this."You see," the judge went on, "it was through some foolish banter of Hubert's that Miss Starr first was induced to ride. She had expressed herself as loving the exercise, and longing to ride a good horse, and then this arrangement was made; but Miss Starr, it seems, does not admire our useful if somewhat unreliable bronco, and declared herself willing to ride a good horse, something `above the pony size'; and Hubert promised her the best horse in the territory, meaning, of course, his brother's mare. When Philip heard of this, he was horrified, for no woman had ever mounted the mare. At first he flatly refused to allow Hubert to have his horses; but later he realised the embarrassment the boy would feel, and changed his mind. At first, it seems, she haughtily refused to accept the late peace-offering. Phil did not go much into details here, but he admitted that it was only when he hinted that she might quite naturally, after

seeing the horse, hesitate about trusting herself uh(m its back that she consented to ride. And it was then that he declared that it could only be with his escort."" What a state of things ! " I exclaimed, with Box No. 10 in my mind." Phil said that when he drew the pistol, seeing no salvation for her but to shoot his mare, he did not see his brother at the track side, and it was only when I called ' Don't shoot!' that he saw Pony Jack with his lariat, and realised that there would be more danger to her than to the horse by that method."" I think Jack realises that now," I said."Yes. He was half full, he says, and the other half crazy. Do you know yet what caused that lariat to slacken so suddenly ? "" Jack dropped it."" True, as soon as he had sense enough. But that would have been too late if Morton's pistol-shot had not severed the rope, or so nearly so that it broke with the strain of the falling horse." He was silent a moment. At last he added:" Yes ; I'm sorry for Phil ! He has an idea, I fancy, that Miss Starr herself blames him in some way; and, do you know, from a word she let drop last night, I've got two queer ideas sticking in my mind."May I hear them ? ''" The first is, I, too, think that Miss Starr blames him. The other idea is that Sydney Starr knew that the bridle was broken when she mounted the horse."" Good heavens! That would mean--suicide, or the attempt--"" It's too complicated," declared the judge. " Let's sleep on it. Or better still, forget it for a bit." And

he began to set out fresh glasses and a long-necked bottle.It was late when I came out upon the street and took a turn about town, and a look into Mike's in passing. MacIntyre was still at the card-table, wan and haggard. The Deacon was curled up, and sleeping as best he could across two chairs, waiting for his chum ; and save for the inactivity about the tables and the distant scraping of fiddle and viol, the place was abnormally quiet. Even the bar-room held only a small group or two, and these seemed holding aloof from the bar and to be occupied with low-voiced talk, which was broken off at the approach of the people of the house.It was to one of these groups that a young miner addressed himself on entering almost before the door had closed after him." Say, boys," he called out, " d'ye know the burg's hot 'bout now ? Hube Morton's took with newmony bad, an' they say--" Here his voice fell, and he cast a significant glance toward the bar, where Mike was making a feint at entering something in a book.And then upon the lull that made outside sounds audible broke a sound from the street, the sound of voices singing uproariously, if not with melody, and the words that came to our ears, and that caused Mike Aiken to let the pen slip unheeded from trembling fingers, were these:" We'll hang Mike Aiken to a sour apple tree," etc., etc., " And tie him with his own nose rag. Glory, glory" etc., etc,CHAPTER XVII
VERY MUCH MIXEDNEXT morning, as I was about to enter the breakfastroom, the Deacon called me, and I went across and seated myself near him and Mac'.Masters," began Mac', " I find that I've met with a loss, or been robbed, and I want to ask you a question or two. No offence, I hope ? "" Not at all," I replied, with humorous intent." Want to search me, too? When did I do the deed ? "" Pshaw ! " put in the Deacon, " Mac' didn't mean that. You remember one night when we were first here ? I was away--"" More foul, you," put in Mac', who was evidently in an ill-humour." I had plenty of company that night! Well, Mac' has a faint remembrance of walking back from Mike's in your company." Here lie winked broadly, and Mac' sniffed. " Well, then," remonstrated the Deacon, " you tell the story."" Do," I urged politely." All right, then. Well, early that evening I had occasion to take from the place where I keep my valuables a small box or package, and to examine it." (I thought of a package lying in the safe of the chief of police, and looked as sympathetic as I could.) " I

had been bowling up a bit," Mac' continued, "though it was early."" Oh, we accept your apologies," murmured the Deacon." Dry up! Well, I suppose that would account for my putting the thing into my pocket, instead of--where it belonged--if I did put it there."" In your pocket, you mean ? " I suggested." Of course ! It seems to me that I found it, or felt it once in some pocket, I can't say which one. I didn't miss it until--till sometime next day," he went on, addressing himself to me ; "and I thought --I wondered--"I did not choose to let him proceed, and I did not desire to be questioned, so I got up with much offended dignity in my face and manner."Are you trying to accuse me of burglary, Mr. MacIntyre ? Or do you think I picked your pocket at Mike's ? If you will get to the point I shall know how to meet you ; at present 1 can get no hint from your language of what you have lost. Is it money, or bonds and mortgages, or wearing apparel, or family jewels? And am I to be arrested now, or may I be permitted to eat my breakfast ? "My tirade succeeded, and after a duet of explanations and apologies, we came to an understanding, and, after a little more discussion, went in to breakfast together. Mac' had described his lost packet as containing some " family papers," and " a few jewels that had been his aunt's " ; but he had no memory of the events of that night, save of the haziest and most uncertain sort, and as there had been no signs of disturbance in his rooms, he came to the conclusion that someone had relieved him of the packet while he was " full," and at Mike's.It was evident that the loss of the packet was heavy upon Mac's mind, and equally clear that lie could devise no safe way of advertising or of offering a reward for its return.While we sat thus, deep in the question of Mac's loss, two women came in and seated themselves quietly at a small table near the corner window, and I saw, with some surprise, that they were Sydney Starr and Roxy Higgins.Mac', who sat at the side of the table nearest them, did not observe their entrance, and the Deacon seemed not at all impressed by it.In his preoccupation, Mac' had been rather neglecting his breakfast, and now he put out his hand, and catching a waiter by the sleeve, said, in a needlessly loud voice, "See here, boy ; take away this cold stuff, and bring me a hot one--piping, mind ye ! " and lie let go of the arm, to touch with a finger the coffee-cup which, I noted for the first time, was at his left hand.From my place I could see the face of Miss Starr without turning my head, and had been quietly watching her strangely refined face, with its haunting resemblance to I knew not whom or what ; and as Mac's hand shot out, I saw her start, and glance first at the hand, then at the face, and then back to the hand again.Mac's hands were short and broad, and across the back of the one under her eye was a livid scar, the mark of a dirk, almost straight across from the root of the thumb to the outer edge of the hand.It bore one other noticeable and more decorative ornament in the shape of a ring upon the fourth finger, a queerly designed ring with an opal setting;. Though old-fashioned, it looked like a lady's ring ;

and if I had not known Mac's liking for rings and pins and other finery, I should have wondered to see it upon his ugly hand.Was it this ring that first struck Sydney Starr, and made her start and tremble, and almost rise from her chair ? Certainly it was the hand that first met her eye, and just as certainly, I thought, it was Mac's voice that had first caused her to start and look up from the paper.And then she had turned her eyes upon the newlyshaven and good-looking profile, and at the sight of the face the dread in her own had grown.As the waiter left us and approached her table, Miss Starr slipped from the seat she had occupied to that opposite Roxy Higgins and nearest to Mac', but with its back to his ; and then I heard her say softly, while Mac's voice was still running on:" As soon as possible, please ! I am in haste this morning." At which Roxy started, and opened her mouth, only to close it again and turn to emphasise the order she had already given.And now I purposely prolonged my own meal, and delayed that of the others, and after a short time that which I looked for happened.Miss Starr pushed back her chair noiselessly, and followed by Roxy, left the room.Presently, as I tapped my cup to summon back our waiter, I, said carelessly:" How is this, Charlie boy ? Is Miss Starr a new boarder here, or is this a first appearance out of turn ? "" Eh !" Mac' cried out, and then he checked himself, and pushed back his plate." This is her first meal here, sir ; but they're to be reg'lar after this, I believe. Rox Higgins, she came in las' night an' 'ngaged day-board for 'em both."As the boy spoke, I saw Mac's lips form the words, My Lord ! " and then he leaned toward the Deacon and whispered hoarsely:" Where are they ?"" Great Scott, man ! " the other said testily, " they're gone. Lor', I didn't s'pose you'd got it, too." " Got what ? " snarled Mac'." Moon-struck ! Spoilin' to see a pretty face."" Spoilin' to get out o' this, that's what I am ! " growled the now thoroughly enraged man, and he got up and walked toward the entrance to the barroom, the Deacon and myself close at his heels.At the door he halted, and again peered about him." G'wan ! " said the Deacon in his ear, " they ain't in the bar-room."" D---- 'em ! " was the reply. " They're anywhere in this ---- hole ! "For the moment both seemed to have forgotten my existence, and I was glad to step away from then and get back to my own room.Sitting upon the side of my uneasy couch, I tried to untangle the snarl into which my mind was surely get tiny. I could not get Sydney Starr and her affairs out of my head by the direct process of forgetting them and her. I determined to adopt the plan that had helped me with other complications, viz., to dispose of Sydney Starr's case, as well as I could, first. Which meant my notebook, and the peculiar system of abbreviations and shorthand which ensured me a monopoly of my ideas as set down therein.Upon a fresh page I wrote : " S. S. Items." First.--Her first appearance here in character of deceived and deeply troubled young musician, eager to escape from an unbearable position, in which her manner and appearance bore her out."Note.--In spite of which, when the tragic appeal failed, she proves an able actress as well as singer, showing a knowledge of the world quite surprising in one who professed so little." Second.--Her face, in profile--whom does it resemble ?"" Note.--Possibly, if she is the actress whom Philip Morton declares her to be, merely a beautiful and accomplished foreign criminal, I have surely seen her or her picture somewhere abroad. It may be--doubtless is." Third.--She knows MacIntyre, and, it would seem, fears him." Fourth.--Who cut that bridle, or caused it to be cut? Mike? Mac'? Or had she still other enemies?"Fifth.--Why was the business of robbing the Black Hills stage so long neglected? Not because Mac' was crippled ; for now, if not at first, I was sure that he was shamming." Sixth.--Who was the woman that was living so secluded a life in Nell Green's cottage in the outskirts? Had she to do with the stage robbers? Why was she hiding? And why did Mac' visit her so seldom, and always at night?"Seventh.--Why did Pony Jack spy upon this strange and mysterious new-comer ? And last, what had caused Mac' to leave his room on the east side of the house for another on the west at sight of something in the house opposite--Roxy Higgins' house ?"And here I walked to my window and looked out. I had looked out many times before, but the windows were always closed and the curtains drawn.To-day, however, my luck had changed. The window was open, the curtains drawn. Since the change made by Mac', I occupied the one vacated by him.One part of the room opposite was visible, and on that side Roxy Higgins was vigorously flapping a (luster, her tongue wagging the while. The other and invisible side had an occupant then, of course ; and a moment later this occupant, clad in a loose house-robe, came into sight, walked to the window and threw out a handful of faded flowers. It was Sydney Starr." I might have known it," I said to myself, and left the window.It was true, then, MacIntyre had been startled and frightened by the sight of Sydney Starr on the day after our second arrival at the hotel, and it was because of her that lie had sacrificed so much of his good looks, along with his beard, moustache, and heavy locks.And then I remembered that I had never since seen Mac' in any conspicuous place at the theatre, and that he seemed to care little for anything at Mike's outside the gaming-room, the one place where the " girls " were not admitted. Could it be that Sydney Starr, upon the stage, was not identified in his mind, at first, with the face at Roxy's window ?And then the lost parcel came again to my mind. When had he first missed it ? And was he sincere in saying that lie could not remember?Did he perhaps suspect me after all ? And what did the Deacon know about this package and its possible value ? Was this an affair belonging exclusively to Mac'? And did this account for the Deacon's unconcern and his inclinations to chaff his " partner," as he sometimes called MacIntyre ?Heretofore I had viewed this quiet man as a sort of Man Friday, a mere shadow of Mac's, and had given his personality little attention, only studying

such of his movements as seemed instigated by his "partner," or to concern him in some manner.And then I was startled somewhat at the recollection that the Deacon, while a most faithful and unobtrusive companion, had, after all, so far as I could see, been of little real use to Mac' save as a companion. Indeed, I could now recall several occasions when, by some carelessness or misadventure, he had hampered his superior.Once I remembered a letter given him to mail and unluckily forgotten ; and again, he had sent a telegram, given him verbally, to the wrong address, causing Mac' to curse, and grow almost hysterical, and the Deacon to declare himself ready to blow his brains out.Yes, clearly I had been stupid, and I must make up for it at once.By way of beginning, I approached the Deacon when I went below again, and began a conversation on the affair of the races and the cutting of the bridle.We were lounging upon the piazza, where the Deacon usually spent his mornings, for he was an earlier riser than Mac' as a rule, and there was little to take one out before midday.He did not take a lively part in the conversation, but I felt sure that I was not unwelcome, and that he, after his fashion, was meeting me half-way.This, of course, might be--probably was--in Mac's interest. However, that did not trouble me; and having arrived at what I thought was the time for personalities, I said:" Well, now, except for that runaway and Miss Starr's momentary danger, the races impressed me as a success, eh ? "" Yes," he replied, " I guess so."You guess ! " and I laughed aloud. " Then you arc not sure? Well, I never took you for a ladies' man, but when I see a young fellow "--he could not have been thirty--" in the company of a lady--" and here I stopped and laughed again.To my surprise, he turned to me a perfectly serious face, and said, as if gratified at the discovery:" Then you did see me! Gosh ! I wondered if you would." And as I made no comment, he went on, as if in exultation:" That was some of Mac's fool doin's." "Oh ! but I didn't sec Mac'."" No," slowly, " because he was not there." Here he got up and moved his chair so that it faced the door near us. " It was like this," lie went on. " We were drivin' around town near where the soldiers kept their rennin' stock. Mac' wanted me to drive there."" I see."" And we were just passin' one of the short cuts to the main road to town when a woman came alongside, on the side next to Mac', an' says: `Are ye goin' to town, gents ?' And before I could get out a ' No, ma'am,' she goes on : ' I am so anxious to find a way to ride in, just to the outskirts or to the end of Alain Street.'" Well, what does Mac' do but begin to scramble out of that buggy--lame leg, crutch and all"--here the humorous gleam came into his eyes--" and says he : 'My dear madam, I am crippled, just a little bit ; but I am glad to aid a lady, and my friend, I know, will be pleased to take you safely to Main Street.' lie sort of emphasised the last two words, and I thought it was a hint to me to go no farther. Well, she got in, and I drove her to Main Street." Again he paused, and this time his eyes were grave, and

they met mine with a look of perfect frankness. If it was a bait, it was certainly well done." I'm sure," I said apologetically, " I hope you didn't mind my chaff. Yes, I saw you, or thought it was you, with a lady, or I thought it was a lady. You were at some distance."" I can't swear that it was a lady," he said, " for I did not see her face. She had on a thick veil, tied down close ; and when I see a woman rigged like that, I feel pretty certain there's nothing behind the screen to make a man lose his sleep or appetite."" And she didn't introduce herself?,," Not she! She remarked before we left Mac' that she had lost track of her friends, and she didn't care for the races. She had `been long enough,' she said."" Odd! " I said, and paused, fearing I had said too much."Well, yes, it seemed so. After we had started, she remarked that she hated to trouble me. She was a stranger in town, trying the climate for her health."" And you--you answered--"" I said, `Yes, 'urn,' and hit the old nag, and tried to make the lady think I had both hands full to hold her, and not breath enough left to talk. It didn't take us long to get her to the foot of Main Street."" Really, I'm quite interested. You didn't improve your opportunities, Deacon."" Oh, yes, I did," again with that serious, open look. "I drove around the block, tied the nag behind that big billboard of Mike's at the crossin', and got 'round in time to see her--through Wykoff's high board fence--goin' into Nell Green's cottage. That satisfied me."" Of what ? "
"That she was not an entire stranger to MacIntyre. I'd seen him figurin' with the Green woman two or

three times. Mac' is playin' his own game, seems like," pensively." And you ? " I queried." Same here," he said, and began to whistle softly, " See the Conquering Hero comes."Glancing up, I saw MacIntyre standing in the doorway, and almost started in my surprise at the change a slight "touch" had imparted to his countenance. A few lines, artistically pencilled, had made his brow heavier, and his nose, slightly reddened and probably "shaded " a trifle, had lost its symmetrical outline, while the addition of a pair of gold-bowed glasses, very large and round, gave the finish to a quite successful change, which might surprise his friends, but could hardly be questioned ; for red noses are the usual thing after a few drinking bouts, and the sand of that country, as Mac' was already glibly explaining, was " a holy terror for a man's eyesight."That afternoon, while I was sauntering about the town, I chanced (?) to see MacIntyre going, by a roundabout course, toward the north-east end of the town and in the direction of Nell Green's cottage ; and within a radius of a few rods I ran upon Pony Jack, who, in his usual independent fashion, nodded, and went his way openly, so far as I was concerned.While loitering at the vacant corner, I saw, across the open lot and upon the next parallel street, the figure of the Deacon moving quite swiftly for him, and he was also going toward the cottage near the head of Main Street ; and once again I asked myself if 1 had not underrated this man and if MacIntyre was not still doing so.CHAPTER XVIII
STORM-CLOUDSBEFORE the end of the next week some unpleasant things had happened, and the town was in a state of ferment and brooding dissatisfaction that, in such a place and at such a time, might easily culminate in serious trouble at any moment.When the first whisper which sought to connect the name of Philip Morton with the affair of the race-track began to be blown about the town, I, of course, at once recognised the hand of Mike Aiken. But I was not in a position to help Morton by declaring this fact.Indeed, the story of that interview in Box 10 would have gone far to condemn him in the eyes of a western mob; and as the story grew in size, and spread with frequent repetition, I began to fear that this was the thing Mike was plotting to bring about.Matters were running smoothly at the theatre. Mike had been wise, and had left Sydney Starr to his stage manager, and, as one result, the girl was doing her work well and adding to her laurels.Still, to those who knew the signs, the situation was growing interesting and looking serious. Never since his first palmy days had Mike dealt with his impecunious customers--those who "ran their face"--so royally. It was noticeable, too, that the town was filling with rough cowboys from the far-out ranches and ranges ; the miners, who seldom came

to the full light of day, and then only to drink deeply, to make a joyful and discordant noise, and to paint the town and, incidentally, some of its occupants sickening red.These men were not slaves to beauty, nor to melody, and they only found themselves "uplifted," sole and heel, in the wild and free-for-all cancan of the dance-houris.But they all bowed the neck to Mike for a variety of reasons, all of which had one thin,, in common, the cup that cheers.Wherever a group of these men was found together, the name of Philip Morton was among them, like a bone among snarling curs ; and then there were accusations and threats, and baseless fictions flew from lip to lip, with a " You know" and a " I hear," and " They say," and presently some rough miner would cry out: " And here's Mike a-standin' by that poor girl, an' tryin' to make her feel safe; and I say, boys, let's stand by him--and let's make things safe for the little Starr. Huh! " And the old song of John Brown's Body " is again revived, and they sing it at first softly and with caution, but later, as the days pass and the " boys " come " over the divide" "to see our Uncle Mikey, oh ! " it is heard wherever drink has done its work, and can, of course, be held accountable next day.And all the while Lieutenant Philip Morton goes about his duties with haughty head and pale, stern face ; and when he rides past with his sabre clanking, or walks the streets erect and soldierly, the threats are hushed and the songs cease, for Phil Morton is a crack shot, and there is a rumour current among the " boys " which sounds like " the proud cuss."It is that he has said : " I can't trace such an

accusation home, perhaps, and I don't intend to try ; but I can shoot the first man that tries to fling the insult in my teeth, and -- I'll do it.""And he may have said it," declared the judge, as we discussed the state of affairs in his room, where I had grown to be a frequent visitor ; "but no one could say that it was said to him--at least, no one did. And if Phil Morton did say it, let them look out, for he will be as good as his word !"" And he goes about meantime a constant target and temptation to that precious gang that hovers every night at Mike's. Let him put out his hand to draw out his handkerchief or cigar-case, and some half-drunken idiot, who is loaded for just such a chance, will whip out a gun and--pop ! out goes a man's light because of the yelp of a gang of brutes."" And how well the fellow bears himself," went on the judge, still following his own train of thought. " I don't believe he has ever spoken of this scandalous charge to anyone. He simply ignores it.""And his friends know that this means `hands off.' Still, it's very likely his superior officer may have spoken of it to him.""Sibly's a gentleman," said the judge, "and a friend to Morton."" Officers have their duties, and they are not always pleasant ones. I think the matter harasses Miss Starr."" I am sure of it! We see each other often, of late, in the half-way meeting ground of Roxy's sitting-room, and I'm sorry for that girl. More than that, I think she's breaking ! ""Ah! How?"" In spirit and courage and endurance. I believe you are a humane man, Masters, and I'm going to

trust you. We--that is, Roxy Higgins, who is a jewel in the rough, the old doctor, and myself, have been putting all the pressure that we dare upon her to induce her to quit the whole thing. Chuck it and go back east, or farther west--anywhere, away from here.""And she?"" I think she's weakening. At first she would not hear of it, because to do it, she said, meant simply a new obligation that she could see no way of repaying. But of late something has caused her to change her attitude somewhat."" You say of late ? ""Well, a week ago--yes, eight days ago, to be exact." He paused as if expecting comment, but I was silent. It was exactly eight days since she took her first breakfast at our hotel and saw MacIntyre.Now," the judge resumed, " she admits her longing to get away, and her growing horror of the nights at Mike's. That place of Aiken's ought to catch fire again," he added savagely." She seems to have found a good friend in Roxy Higgins," I ventured." She has! It's Roxy we rely on most now; and hang it, Masters, I believe you can be trusted where Miss Starr is concerned. I'm going to tell you the whole thing."" Certainly you may trust me," I said, " and if there is to be any such thing as an attempt to pay off Mike and release the girl, you may count on me for any sum within my limit." I was not posing as a man of wealth. That role was too risky and too popular." That's kind of you, and I had thought of it, but after we had talked it over, the three of us, and though none of us are millionaires exactly, as you

probably know, we had decided to raise the needed amount among ourselves, when Phil Morton came in one day and said a word or two that let me see how anxious he is about that brother of his. Then I dropped just a hint to the effect that Miss Starr was finding her position harder all the time, and adding that I had advised her to leave, and offered to help her. Whereupon he sat down and told me something that I had never suspected, nor had any reason to suspect. That is that he, Philip, is a rich man, and that he would gladly place in my hands any sum I named and he would rather it be a large one, to aid Miss Starr here and make her comfortable somewhere else. But he added that she must not see his hand in this, because she would never accept it from him; and then," concluded the judge, "he said a thing that has puzzled me ever since--said it without forethought, and seemed vexed that the words had slipped off his tongue."" What was it?" He said : `She hates me and she fears me ! The first with some reason ; the last with more.' Now, could you imagine what the fellow meant by that?I looked the judge squarely in the eye." I won't be less frank than I must," I said. " I need not call upon my imagination for what I know. There, judge, I can only replace one puzzle by another, for I won't give away Morton's secret. One night about a week before that race I chanced to be in Box No. 11 with Mike Aiken, when we overheard a conversation between the lieutenant and Miss Starr. I told Morton of it, and he made some explanations. Yes," replying to the inquiry in his eye, " I know why she hates and why she fears him, but since he has not spoken, I can say no more."The judge mused for a moment, then: "Of course, there will be an uproar at Mike's, and I have sometimes fancied that this sudden coming in of 'Mike's horde from the mines is a sort of preparation for something that may increase his interests. It would be very much against his interest for Miss Starr to quit him."It would indeed, and I have observed that the people who, as it were, have formed in line and rallied to her support, as opposed to Mike, are not in his good books--not in the ring, at present.""No, but they're just as ready to stand by the girl now as they were then, and some of them are spoiling for something to have a scrimmage over."" Jersey Pete, for example, the meekest-looking little man in the whole crowd," I suggested.Yes, and the wildest and wickedest fighter once his blood is up."" I begin to think," I said as I was about to go," that the sooner Miss Starr and this city part company the better for the peace of the people and the safety of property!"" That's so ! " pronounced the judge.I had thought once that MacIntyre was making furtive efforts to speak with Sydney Starr, unseen by the Deacon or any witness, but he never gave her an opportunity to see him at close quarters in the hotel dining-room or about the passages and "stoops." Evidently he feared or dreaded what might escape her lips in the surprise of a first meeting, for it was evident to me that lie had deluded himself with the belief that she had not recognised him.If he had been alone in his desire to avoid a meeting in public he might have found it somewhat

difficult. But it was as evident that Miss Starr sought to shun him as that he shunned her, and the result was a marked success.Not long after her appearance at the Lindholm tables with Roxy, that amiable and faithful friend began to put in an appearance at the theatre, when she announced herself as Miss Starr's " dresser," greatly to the amusement of the girls.Pony Jack at first rather resented Roxy's chaperone ship. But when he found himself occasionally permitted to walk along, now beside Roxy, now beside Sydney, on their homeward way, and found that the girl's laugh was more free than of old, her speech more ready, and at times, almost gay, he felt quite happy, while this lasted ; only--" You moind, Jack," said Roxy, in her usual jesting way, " you're not to be too attentive to me, nor yet to Miss Sydney here. It won't do, becos' I'm too young to keep stiddy comp'ny, an' Sydney's younger yet. Besides, it ain't gintale ! Wance a wake, or the like, maybe's enough, Jack, an' fur the rest ye must give the other b'ys a chanst. I'm powerful popular, ye know."And Jack was delighted to hear Sydney's laugh at this rough nonsense blending with his own big guffaw.As Jack opened Roxy's gate for them one morning, and stood for a moment looking wistfully across it, he said hesitatingly" I don't want ter quiz ye, Miss Syd, but it seems like ye was feelin' better than ye used, and I'm glad ter see it. I only wish I could have a hand in makin' things seem jollier fer ye ! I wish ye'd keep on likin' western ways and vote, some day, to spend all yer days west of the Mississip'."" Why, Mr. Jack, do all those who come west vote to stay? You don't always mean to live here, surely.""Here, or farther on. I'm western bred, Miss Syd, an' I'd die in a biled shirt an' a dicky."" And you wouldn't look half so handsome, Jack," declared Sydney warmly. " But I must say goodmorning, for Roxy is pinching my arm."" Well," said Roxy, " this early wind and sand are not pleasant," and she put out her hand to him." My! " exclaimed Roxy when they were safely within, " if Jack and a squad more of the b'ys knowed ye were goin' to skip out so soon, wouldn't there be a loud lamentin' an' a nashin' o' teeth ! An' from a diffrunt rayson from Mike's, drat 'im.""Don't, Roxy, dear! It scares me somehow. It seems too good to be true, and yet--" she suddenly threw her arms about Roxy's fat neck and began to sob. " Oh, Roxy Higgins, do you know what it is like to be all alone ? Roxy, in all the world you're the best, the only friend I have, and I hate to leave you ! "" Tchut ! Well, that sounds good ! My faith, but I'm almost burstin' with delight, bekase then I'm goin' wid ye ! "An hour earlier than her usual time of rising next day Mrs. Higgins was astir, and crossing from the hall where she and Sydney were close neighbours to another where her male lodgers were domiciled, she tapped sharply at a closed door.It was opened by the judge, and she slipped in quickly, and softly closed the door." Roxy," he began, as courteously as if in a lady's drawing-room, " you must pardon me, I did not forget, nor oversleep this morning, but while moving about,

trying to keep awake until you were at liberty, I heard Miss Starr weeping, and was so fearful lest she learn that we were plotting--for I feared that her weeping would mean sleeplessness, it does, does it not ?--that I came back here and got into bed."" And went to sleep, Oi'll be bound! Well, judge, I give up! I'm goin' to do ut.""You will ? " He smiled broadly."That is, if she'll let me on the terms ye fixed. But let me tell yiz," and she briefly but graphically described to him the scene with Sydney Starr and the few words with Jack at the gate which had led up to it.For the plan to send Sydney away had been quietly nursed and perfected, and, best of all, kept secret, and it was soon to be put in execution."You can get away," the judge had said to Miss Starr, " by a little management, on a midnight train to Sydney. I can arrange that, and you will have caught the first train out of Sydney in the morning long before Mike has opened his eyes to his loss, and to find awaiting him, along with his breakfast coffee, the notice of your departure with full indemnity for services not rendered."But Sydney Starr had thrown back her handsome head and said:"Judge, I thank you, and I hate to seem ungrateful, but I cannot go away like that. I will not. I will not play the coward at the last. I will not run away from Mike Aiken, or from anyone, and I will not give my enemies the cause they would have for slandering me if I ran away alone, or with a companion, at midnight."But her consent was at last won, and when the committee--of which I was asked to be a member,


for effect, rather than because I was of any especial value or use--had looked carefully over the ground, it was decided that, on a certain day, the doctor should send Mike word that Miss Starr positively could not appear, that " her health and future usefulness would depend upon the outcome of the next two weeks," and that she ought to recuperate in a soft, mild climate like that of California.Then she should keep her room for a couple of days, and afterwards send for Mike, and, in the presence of Roxy and the doctor, tender her withdrawal from the contract, which was a little more than half expired.We had all prepared ourselves in so good a cause to "strain a point," as the doctor put it, or as, in Roxy's vernacular, " The truth's too good to waste on Mike Aiken, anyhow ! "The first white lie was a joint affair when we of the committee assumed the attitude of generous contributors towards the small sum which was all she would consent to accept, barely enough to refund Mike's advance, and "square" him according to the letter of the contract, by "paying a fixed sum for each week in default." Beyond this she would accept her railway fare and a few dollars for immediate necessities, but nothing more.Roxy was in ecstasy."She wants me!" the good soul declared, again and again. " She wants me just as bad as I want her ! An' that alters the case. Only, judge, me dear man, ye'll have to do the lyin' fer me, just till I've practised a bit. Not that me conscience is thrubblin' me--it's not that, in a good cause ; but it's me tongue that's like to thrip an' throw me till I've got it larnt."So the judge waited upon Sydney again, and alone.CHAPTER XIX
EXIT MIKE" Miss STARR," the judge began, " I have come to present a new proposal, or at least a change in the former plan." And then, in his own plausible and convincing fashion, he put what he called Roxy's case before her." It appears," he said, " that this good woman has more money at her disposal than most of us have realised, enough certainly to enable her to live at her ease and be a bit generous--even extravagant if she wishes. And, as you surely must know, she is devotedly attached to you."" I believe that," said the girl, almost humbly, "and her affection is returned, I assure you ! "That is why she has ventured to empower me to come to you with a request. To go with you, to care for you, and be of use to you in her humble, honest way, would have made her as happy as she could hope to be in this world ; so the good soul thought, but she dared not proffer her companionship at first. It appears now that something which occurred this morning has led her to think her companionship would not be unwelcome, and so she appeals to me."" I think I know," the girl began, but he hurried on:"Just a few words more. I cannot give you her message as she gave it to me. She was afraid to come in person ; she is quivering now with nervous anxiety, lest she be mistaken after all."" Quick, then ; I am getting nervous, too. What is it?"" Simply this. Roxy has grown to love you ; you have become the brightest spot in her life, and she begs you to let her go away with you to California, or the south, where, together, you can make a new home. She asks only to serve you as she has done here, and she wishes you to feel that all that is hers is yours."There was more detail and much of eloquence, for the girl pressed him with questions, doubting, fearing, and through it all, tenderly grateful and evidently lighter at heart for this revelation of such a friend in need.And then, suddenly, in the midst of his final and repeated declaration of Roxy's willingness to serve, and the recognition of the difference between them, the girl sprang up and faced him." Oh," she cried, "don't! I can't bear it. You talk of the difference between us. Yes, there is a difference, but the advantage is all hers, not mine. You recognise, you tell me, the signs that are proofs to you, if not to her, that I have lived in a different atmosphere, a higher. A 'different,' perhaps, but a higher--no ! What queen upon a throne ever gave more graciously, more royally, than she is giving to me ? And queens give favours for favours. I can give nothing--less than nothing."" You can give what she wants most."" I know ! I know! She is a loving, tender, bighearted woman, and such women suffer tortures when they have no one--nothing to love. And she asks so little. Only to serve me ! Well, you who have read so much of my past, tell me, do you know me well enough--the me of the present--to say whether I


have learned, in these horrible past two months, how wide the difference between that unlettered woman and myself really is ? No, we are not equals ! And any service between Roxy Higgins and me henceforth will be mutual. Oh, I shall not refuse ! How can I, when it is like opening to me the gates of heaven ? "" Oh, me soul! " groaned Roxy, listening in the next room, for how could Roxy wait? "Mary, Mother! forgive him the lies he's a-tellin' for me! ""But, understand me, there will be for me no place and no people where, or among whom we may go, that shall not receive us as equals in everything," Sydney declared." My dear, think ! You '.~ ill kill Roxy if you try to make a lady of her."" She is a lady, and of Nature's own making. There, judge, thank you a hundred times, and now I must see Roxy."It was the doctor who broke the news to Mike." The brute was in a temper when I found him," he reported to the judge, " and he'll be a tornado by now. I heard him storming at that blessed `safe' as I passed there on my way to the post-office."And then Roxy came in ostensibly to hear of his success. Really, to tell a bit of news." Hear the latest," she began. " D'ye know phwat that ould divil's been at last ? "" Cursing," we all said at once." Av coorse ! But before that last thing, I reckon, afore Mike seen ye, doc, he had a ruction with those two Mortons. Yis, sor. It was Rosy herself ran in a minut to tell me, an' it seems like the two b'ys comes inty the caffy tigether, laughin' an' happy like.'Twas the b'y's first time out since the trubble, an' I s'pose it just madded Mike, for lie opened out on 'em, an' when he said a mane thing to the b'y, the lootinant takes him by the scruff an' shakes him like he's a rat. An' then Mike called for help, an' it came powerful slow, an' Mike stormed an' swore an' ordered 'cm never to darken his door agin. An' at that the lootinant laughed hard an' slapped his brother across his hack, an' flung Mike a twenty dollar gold piece like he's a tacky, an' took his brother out, still a laughin'. But Rosy says the b'y didn't laugh. He looked mortial glum."Before evening, Mike humbled himself so far as to send for Roxy Higgins. And for once Roxy was graciously willing--in fact, rather too eager to comply. It boded no good to Mike, at least to his ears, and Roxy would take good care that other ears were also regaled.The ould baste ! " she sputtered, when she came back. " He wanted to bribe me--me, Roxanne P. Higgins ! The ould thafe of the world ! An' it was wan thousant, would I coax Sydney to give him jest wan more wake. ' Yis,' says Oi, ' so's ye could impache the good docther's subscription.' Ah, well, laugh if ye like. Then it was five hundred if I'd let him in me house by the sly way, an' spring him by s'prise upon the blessed girl, so's he could make her talk, when she warn't all loaded with speeches cut an' dried--the ould divil ! "" Well," sighed the judge, shaking his head, " I'll be glad, for the poor girl's sake, when it's over ; somehow I am uneasy about that cur Mike."Two other items of news came to us before it was time for the curtain to rise at Mike's that night.Pony Jack, who was drinking heavily these days, came upon Hubert Morton on the street, and there was an exchange of words, the young soldier being baited into the quarrel, which he had tried to avoid.Jack was ugly, but not quite off his guard, and the two men parted, Jack with pistol drawn, and young Morton with clenched fists.Jack at once repaired to Mike's. Mike was in a. still blacker mood than he, and high words and two pistols came into play, and Mike was forced to call upon the man Dill and his bar-keeper, both of whom met with hard usage at the hands of the now thoroughly aroused cowboy, who went away vowing he would "have his meat" before morning.This falling out caused much wonder, the general opinion being that it would be a long feud. " They are not of the forgiving kind," someone declared, "and neither one will make a first show of hands."Imagine, then, the surprise of the saloon critics, when, in the course of the evening, Mike was seen openly and successfully proffering the olive branch to Pony Jack. After which there was " a drink at the bar," a long talk in the office, and finally another drink ; after which Pony Jack declared his intention to turn in " before the birds did "--it was then midnight--for he "had got to start out for Kelly's ranch at three," and two hours' sleep was "as good as two brandies to brace a feller up."It had been decided by Sydney's friends that no announcement of her departure should be made, for reasons that were obvious. But they had rather feared rebellion on the part of Mike.To their surprise he agreed that this would be the wisest course, and although he still looked gloomy

and resentful, he bore himself like a man who, knowing himself wronged, and resenting it, still wishes to do the polite and dignified thing.As for Sydney herself, lie did not once approach her after this one meeting in Roxy's parlour, where he had posed as an aggrieved person rather than as an aggressor, and had made his enormous financial a	loss his chief grievance." Upon me sowl, judge," Roxy declared, " I don't like ut ! The ould rat's got some divilment up his sleeve. Sydney, d'ye mind me : I'll not take me eye off ye the night, not wance, if I have got to go out with me camp stool an' sit wid ye on the ould rat's ugly stage."But Roxy's vigilance found nothing to criticise or resent. It was an orderly and comparatively quiet night at Mike's.When the judge saw Pony Jack withdraw at an "early " hour, he smiled." If he only knew ! " he said to himself; and then: " I wish the poor girl was well out of it."That morning, for the second time, the judge walked home with Roxy and Sydney Starr--Roxy,in spite of them, lagging along behind.Once or twice she fancied someone was following stealthily, but it was still quite dark, and she could not trust her own aroused and " nervy fits," as she over and over assured herself."Glory be!" she cried, when she had closed and bolted the door. " We're in, and the ould b'y's out! Hi, but this bolt slides as if it had been tastin' the castor ile, so slick ut is ! Now, my chickey, what'll it be--tay an--? "But Sydney put out her two hands, and they were trembling." Roxy," she said, " I want to go to my room straight. I--I am very tired--and--if you'll just go to bed at once, and let the house be still--I--I shall rest easier--I know."Of course Roxy was all for haste and quiet after that, and before Sydney entered her room she turned and flung her arms about the woman's neck.You good, faithful friend ! " she cried, almost in tears. " To think that we're going away from this hateful place--together ! Somehow, I don't quite believe it yet.""Ye will to-morrow, dearie," replied Roxy. "Slape swate now, an' the saints bless ye ! "And Sydney Starr, standing at her open window, the one opposite the east wall of the hotel, whispered to herself, through lips that trembled and were very white" She'll be asleep as soon as she touches her pillow. The dear soul! I wonder where I shall sleep! Heaven help me!"At twenty-five minutes past four the policeman who was supposed to do duty around that block upon which stood the Lindholm Hotel and Roxy Higgins' house, aroused himself from a nap in a convenient doorway, and shook himself awake." Seem's if I'd heard somethin'," he muttered. "Wonder what?--my souls! was I dreamin' ? Seem's if a shot was a-ringin' in my ears yit!" and he hurried around the corner to the front of the " Lindholm." Then he uttered a sharp oath. " Somebody's runnin'!" he cried, and began to run also. But only a step. Then he brought himself up with a jerk. "He's comin' to'rds me! Gee ! Say !--halt there, you--or

I'll shoot !	Throw up yer hands ; I've got yer covered ! Dum ! he's got into the alley!"He sprang forward and called again, but at the alley's mouth he was stopped short; a pistol shot whizzed past him, and he drew back." No use to follow him in there now," he muttered.It's black as Toby. Gee ! he's cooped hisself now! He can't git round Rox' Higgins' high spiked fence, an' it's er blind alley. I'll jest cut round, an' I'll head 'em off yit." And he "cut round" accordingly.There was an unfinished building next to Roxy's home--a dwelling begun by a gambler, who abandoned it, and decided to leave his family " back East." The ground was littered with builder's debris, and into this the officer was about to plunge, when a sound near him froze his blood almost, coming, as it seemed, from directly under his feet.It was a hollow moan, and now for the first time he opened his lantern slide. "No use makin' yourself a targit," as he had often said. But he was not at all a coward. He simply " knew the ways, an' the chances," and now he called out: "Where are ye ? " and raised the lantern high. " Ah ! "He sprang forward to where in a depression, where the earth had been removed at some time, leaving a hollow of a foot or more in depth, lay a huddled-up figure.The officer flashed the lantern above it and cried out in affright : " Mike Aiken !--by--" and he knelt and sought to lift him." Don't--it hurts !" the man moaned.The officer lifted the light again. He saw a gashed coat-sleeve, and the blood oozing from the arm within." Mike, it's jest a flesh wound ! I bet you're good fer a long life yet. See!" and he lifted the arm

"there's no bones broken ! But, Lor' ! "--here he lifted his long-neglected whistle and blew a sharp blast--" who knifed ye, Mike?"Mike Aiken lifted, or tried to lift his hand, and clench it, while his white lips framed an oath." Curse her! " he groaned ; " it was that little she-devil--Sydney -- Starr ! Oh ! " as a convulsive shudder shook his frame, " I think I'm hurt--somewhere--else." His head fell back; his hands fluttered feebly, as if to go to his breast ; he gasped chokingly and lay suddenly still.He was dead ! And at that moment the door of Roxy Higgins' house swung open, and Roxy and the judge came out together.CHAPTER XX
AT THE QUIET HOURKNOWING, as I did, of the coming change at Mike's, 1 had been in close attendance at the theatre, going home a few moments later than the judge and his party.I had felt somewhat apprehensive of Mike, and had kept as near him as was feasible and safe, considering my other interest, viz., MacIntyre.But I soon found that to keep an eye upon one of these gentlemen was to have an eye upon the other, for the two seemed, at every opportunity, to come together, in some place a little aloof from the crowd, and to have much to say to each other.I had never before observed any appearance of especial friendship between these two men, but upon this night it was very evident, if they were not friends, they at least had some strong interests in common. And then, as I was lounging in the bar-room, waiting to see MacIntyre set out, I met with a sudden and surprising new discovery, or, as I might better call it, a sensation ; for it affected me as little else, at first.They were standing together near the street door, Mike and MacIntyre, apparently exchanging some last words, and both faces were grave, even to grimness. They stood face to face, with both profiles toward me, and something in the faces caused me to start." What is it?" said a voice at my elbow, and I turned to see the Deacon close beside me.I had not heard his approach, and had not so much as seen him before that moment throughout the evening. He also was looking at the two men, and before I thought, I had said : "" You are looking at Mike and your friend, what do you see in common between them?" He turned a quick gaze upon me, and it struck me that he looked rather more alert than usual." Do you mean--outwardly? he asked slowly. I nodded." Well," he said, his eyes still upon my face, " I see a sort of resemblance of figure, though my chum's the biggest and best set up. I guess it's more a habit of standing, and of holding the shoulders, than anything else."Again I nodded." Then, for a good-looking feller--Mac looked better before he shed his feathers--and a deuced ugly one like Mike--there is a queer sort of a resemblance, ain't there, now? "I turned now and looked down into his face ; he was shorter than I." There surely ` air,"' I replied, and turned away, but not too soon for me to see the grin that overspread his countenance. MacIntyre had gone and I was anxious to be going.When I was half-way across the short space between the theatre and the hotel, the Deacon overtook me. MacIntyre was a few yards in advance."My pard seems to be in an unsociable mood to-night," the Deacon said. " Well, I guess he'll git home safe--now."" I reckon so," was my reply, and again I heard my

companion chuckle; but he said no more, and we were soon within our respective rooms.Thinking about the Deacon's queer new development, and of the newly observed resemblance between Mike Aiken and MacIntyre, I sat down and lighted a cigar.It was growing warm, even in that climate, and after a bit I arose and opened my window, and then, by the light of my dingy kerosene lamp I began to read some papers that had arrived in that day's mail.It was while thus occupied that I heard the crack of a pistol, and it seemed to have a closely following echo. I lifted my head, and listened.My room, as I have before explained, looked out at the side, my windows facing those of Roxy Higgins' house opposite; and now as I got up and approached the window I heard light running footsteps, and then a scraping as of something against the boards of one of the buildings.Quickly and silently I put out the light drew up the window shade, and leaned out.I could at first see nothing, but the soft scraping sound continued, and then, as my eye became accustomed to the darkness, I fancied I could see something moving against the side of the house opposite, and--was it possible ?--it seemed to be coming up!Another moment and I had in one hand a small revolver, and in another a slow match--with which I was always supplied. Yes, some one was about to invade the house of the Widow Higgins ; some miscreant burglar or worse, who doubtless knew that this part of the premises was occupied by defenceless women. So my thoughts ran as I waited just a moment longer, and then with my cocked weapon upon the window ledge I knelt, struck my match and looked over.The next instant I dashed out the little light, and called softly"'Sh ! Go on ! Go in, quick! Or--do you need any help ? " Just then came the voice of officer Smith. He was at the mouth of the alley now, and calling, rather weakly, I thought, for some one to come out and give himself up. I did not know the voice, but I knew officer Smith, and that he was on duty that night. So, feeling quite sure of my man, I lifted my pistol and fired in the air." That will keep him out for a short time, at any rate," I again whispered, feeling that my whisper, if the officer heard it, would make him hesitate. And then I held my breath until I knew that the person outside had reached the window and dropped within.For that little gleam of light, so hastily extinguished, had shown to me the pallid, horror-stricken face of Sydney Starr. She was clinging to a frail, builder's ladder, and had almost reached the open window of her own room.With the faint sound that told me she had gained her place of refuge, came a fainter "Thank you!" And in the same guarded whisper I added:"Do not be anxious about the ladder; I can remove that, I am sure, before anyone comes into the alley. Close your window, and trust me. Something serious has happened, I know, but my lips are sealed until I have seen you, and know how to help you. Is there anything more besides the ladder ? " I heard a faint " No," and the soft closing of the window, and turned from my own.Among other articles, I had in my possession a long and strong rope. I was not long in securing this, and letting it run from my hands to the ground, and was equally swift in lowering myself by its aid.I knew that my time must be brief, and so I hastily bore the ladder back to the dividing fence, where, as I knew, it had rested, with its length in the lot ad. joining Roxy's premises, and its upper end projecting a foot or more across the fence.This fence ran from the wall of the hotel--which was built back several feet farther than Roxy's building--and it formed an L stretching from the Lindholm's rear corner past the rear of the Higgins' house, where turning, it ended at the south-east corner of the latter. By this means Roxy's few feet of " backyard," just big enough to contain her fuel sheds and other outbuildings, was enclosed upon the south and east, while standing open to the alley, for the convenience of coal and delivery waggons, which a gate would have barred out owing to want of space.As I gave the ladder its final push across the high board fence--careful lest it be heard from the front of the lot, where I now perceived the gleam of officer Smith's lantern--I heard his whistle, and started at its sharpness and nearness ; and as I put my hand upon the rope to ascend, I heard footsteps crossing the mouth of the alley, and the voice of Roxy Higgins, who evidently was in the lead.As I re-entered my room, and drew up my rope, I thanked fate or fortune that the ladder belonged upon the premises, and would not be likely to point suspicion toward the Higgins home.As I ran lightly down the stairs, I was surprised to see MacIntyre, fully dressed, like myself, come half way in.He stopped short upon seeing me, seeming dazed for an instant, and looking wild and as if uncertain where to turn." What is it, Mac'? " I questioned." I--I don't know," he stammered, as he leaned against the door frame. "I--heard a--a shot--I fancied, and ran down, half awake--""And you've been out, then?"" No ! " he snapped, suddenly aroused by my question. " I was listening, and as I didn't hear anything but these people out-door, thought I'd as well go back," and he made a movement as if to go upstairs ; but I linked my arm in his." Pshaw ! " I said, "come along, let's investigate, anyhow," and he came, rather reluctantly, I thought.As we went down the steps I heard a soft rustle close behind me, and looking back, saw a figure in the doorway, and the dim light burning within showed me the outlines of the Deacon, who, with a quick gesture, drew back into the shadow. The gesture clearly meant " go on," and it also meant that the man was watching his partner.A new suspicion seized me, and with my head in a whirl of conjecture and wonder and suspicion, I hurried along beside MacIntyre. The lantern's glimmer showed us the group about the dead man, and as we came close upon them I was certain that I saw something pass from the judge's hand to that of the police officer, and I heard Roxy's voice, half choked with sobs, " And remimber I'll do it; all ye nade do is--" and then the judge lifted a hand, she ceased speaking, and we were beside them.It was the quiet hour for that place. The people of the theatre were, for the most part, already housed, and the Lindholm stood somewhat aloof from the business part of the town, with much open space, and a few built-up places about it. Arid so it was that the people gathered tardily, and for the most part in response to the whistle of officer Smith.It was this man who was the first to move at our coming, and watching him covertly, I saw him put down his lantern for a moment, and standing in the shadow hastily stuff something into an inner pocket.And then, as he stooped to take up the lantern, I saw a hand snatch it up, and it went gleaming half across the space between us and Roxy Higgins' party wall.It was the Deacon, as I knew at once, and in a moment we heard him call, " Come here--quick."Upon the ground, close to the wall, lay outstretched a tall figure, and as we bent over and the lantern was raised aloft, it shone upon the familiar face of Pony Jack." He's alive! " cried the judge, and Roxy's voice followed quickly."Take him up! careful, men, and fetch 'im to my house. It's the only near and quiet one."I put a hand upon the arm of judge Hobbs, but he was bending over the prostrate man, and in a moment he said, " Captain Barry ought to be here ; who'll go ? "By this time a small group was huddled together over the body of Mike Aiken, and officer Smith was telling the little thus far discovered. But the whistle soon brought two other officers, and while one of them stood guard over Mike's body, the other helped remove Pony Jack, and we were standing about his bed when the chief of police and the doctor arrived." The living first," said the chief."Shot!" commented the doctor, "and a close shave--but not fatal, I hope. Let's get off his clothes.""One moment," interposed the chief; and bending over the bed, he removed from the injured man's

pockets all of their contents, and took them in charge.When the wound was dressed, the patient lying unconscious the while, the doctor gave his orders strictly and with kindly regard to my whispered hint." He must be kept very quiet--no one admitted ; and, Masters, if you can stay with him, I--I think it will be well for the judge to come with me to Aiken's house." The chief had already gone. "Let me know the moment Jack is able to speak," he had said, and added aside to me, "I'm devilish glad you're here, Masters! This is a queer lay out, and I fancy there'll be a big snarl at the bottom of it." To which I fully agreed.The doctor had pronounced the wound serious, but not necessarily fatal. " It's the concussion of the fall, I think," he added, " that accounts for his unconsciousness--that and loss of blood. He'll rally soon. Don't let him talk "--he looked at me, then added softly--" much."It needed but a word to send Roxy off "to tell Miss Starr what had happened, and prevent her becoming alarmed," and so I was sitting alone when Pony Jack opened his eyes and looked at me wildly." Wh--where is--she ? " he asked feebly. I bent over him." Do you mean Miss Sydney?" Yes," he whispered."She is lying down.""She--a--all--right ? ""Yes; but you're not to talk too much, Jack; you're hurt--just a bit, you know."" Yep! " his eyes kindling for an instant. " Tell me--where's that--devil ? ""Who?""Mike--course--" Again I bent over him."Jack, you must look out for that hurt lung! Listen, the doctor says you can get well if you try, but you must obey orders."" How--soon? ""Oh, a week or so. Now answer me one question if you can, and then you must rest until the chief of police comes. Who shot you, Jack?"A spasm as if of pain crossed his face, and then he answered quickly, " Mike--Aiken."I got up and went to the door, then speaking close to his ear, I said : " Listen, Jack. I have seen Miss Starr, just for a moment. I don't understand, but I have promised to help her. They won't be likely to put you under oath--yet. But when they do question you, don't mention her name. Perhaps we can keep her out of it." I saw that he was gratified, and then a look of anxiety crossed his face."That----Mike," he whispered.For a moment I hesitated, but there was much at stake, or so I feared, and I took the risk." Keep your head, Jack," I said slowly, "and promise not to let yourself go--not to faint." " I'm all right--won't--faint.""Mike is dead!" Jack stared at me horrified. " My God!" he cried, and fainted.It was a brief collapse, however, and then he seemed suddenly to have found a measure of his strength. " Quick," he whispered, trying to glance about him, "get my things! In--a--pocket--a letter."Of course he had to know that this, with all his belongings, were in the hands of the chief." My soul," he gasped, " they'll try to drag her in."" I'm afraid so.""You--saw--her ? "" Yes, and promised to stand by her. What do you fear, jack?"" I'll trust you. The letter--was to her--from him--Masters--out there," he waited a moment, then, " They'll say she--" he stopped."Jack," I said, " tell me the truth. Mike Aiken, with his dying breath, accused Sydney Starr of killing him."" It's a lie! I did it!It was useless ; the muddle only grew deeper, and jack was looking terribly pale. I gave him his cordial, and refused to speak again.As I drew the glass from his lips he caught feebly at my hand."You'll stand by her," he urged pleadingly, straight--through ? "" Sure," I declared. " And by you, too, old man!"He smiled weakly, and closed his eyes. And those were his last words for days to come.CHAPTER XXI
THE INQUESTWHILE Pony Jack's wound was being probed and dressed, Roxy had found time to confirm for me what I had before suspected, that the judge--upon hearing, from officer Smith, that Mike had accused Sydney Starr with his last breath--had contrived to buy Smith's silence for a time, and Roxy had seized the first opportunity to make the bargain a permanent one, by increasing the sum largely, and by vowing that to her (Roxy's) certain knowledge, Miss Starr had not left her room since her return from the theatre--which the good soul quite believed--and that her doors were all secured "inside," as the judge himself could swear to.It was this, coupled with what I knew of Sydney Starr's movements that morning, that had caused me to venture such risk, as I certainly took in allowing Jack to talk, and in telling him what I did. Luckily it appeared to stimulate him after the first shock, and no ill effect seemed to follow, at least from that cause.And now we all anxiously awaited Pony Jack's recovery, while the chief of police made a preliminary examination." We must do something to satisfy the people and to give them material to talk about, and," with a grin at me, "to bet on. We must, of course, have some

one on guard at Roxy Higgins' to see that Jack is not tampered with or finished off by the poison route--and I'd like you to be the man! You see you have got the good-will of the people here," here he grinned again, "and it makes it seem a suitable choice. Besides, Jack Braddock wants You!" This was news to me, but I understood him." One proviso there must be," I said. " I must have a substitute--you understand--at need."" I understand ! " he nodded, "and you may make your own choice of one--take a day to consider! "While Mike's body lay in state upon the stage of the theatre, which was closed in all departments save the corner cafe and its bar, the first and "informal" examination was held.Until this visit to the west I had never met Chief Barry, but he was a New York man, and when I set out, or rather before, he was, of course, instructed and stood ready to lend me aid at need.Of course I had studiously avoided the chief's office and any meeting with him, until I had been a week or more in the town. Then we had met at his private quarters, and we fully understood each other.Accordingly, when I volunteered some suggestions concerning the conduct of the inquiry, he was quick to see my reasons and was quite in sympathy with them. After looking about him and conferring with the coroner, he called up the stage-manager and questioned him.Dill declared that he knew only that Mike had been pre-occupied all that evening, and he, Dill, had heard him declare his intention of going home early. He had also said something about "dropping in to

see Cal Mixer," the old end man that's been sick for a couple of weeks, and taking him a bottle o' " hot drops." Dill did not see Mike set out, and could only add that Mixer had been a sort of favourite of Mike's " along back " and that he " lived out past the Lindholm and the Higgins' house." "One would have to pass these places and also the unfinished cottage," he added, " unless he went round the block to get there."The bar-keeper added but one item to this. He had seen Alike go and had heard him tell Mr. MacIntyre up by the bar that he hadn't been up to see the old man since he'd been sick more'n once or so, an' he'd just drop in an' see how the boys was lookin' after 'im. "Ye see," lie explained, "Cal lives in one of them north end cottages kind o' keepin' back, an' a couple o' our fellers are livin' in the front room, an' sort o' look to him."At this point I looked across the room to where MacIntyre and the Deacon were seated, and was just in time to see two heads draw suddenly apart, and one of them move away. It was upon the shoulders of Policeman Smith, whom I had, from the first, feared as a leaky vessel. And, while the chief and the coroner again conferred together, and the crowd in the big room buzzed eagerly, I wrote in my notebook--" Item.--That Mac' was the friend or tool of Mike Aiken, and that Dill and the bar-keeper were, for some reason, primed as a safeguard and so prepared to tell what they have told, at need. This will be verified to me if Mac' confirms their testimony."And just then, without waiting to be called upon, MacIntyre arose in his place and said:" If I may be allowed, gentlemen, I will say that the young man is right ! Mr. Aiken did speak to me of

Mixer, saying that he felt out of sorts, and not like sleeping, and that he thought he'd go and see the old fellow, for he feared the poor soul did not get the care he needed."He turned as if to seat himself and then hesitated--or seemed to." Is there anything more? " asked the chief blandly. " Y--yes."" Aiken had spoken, as he did several times last night, about being 'upset' and `anxious,' and then he says, ` A man's a fool to worry about other people's affairs, but the fact is, one of my young ladies, who has a string of admirers, is about to do a foolish thing! Most people would say I needn't care, for she has not treated me any too well, all things considered, but she's a woman, and--well, I've picked up a letter from a good-looking scamp who makes fine gentleman pretences--and yet who has bullied and threatened her, to my knowledge, and he wants her to meet him--alone-and at a place--well--never mind ! I half think I'll take a hand.' And just here he was interrupted, and we only spoke together for a moment afterward, and that with others about us." Mac paused for a moment, then, " Gentlemen," he added, "there may be nothing in it, but I think this letter should be found and the matter investigated! "Chief Barry was a man of quick thought and action. He had meant to take another course, but while the man was still speaking he decided, and there was scarcely a second of time between Mac's last word and the chief's orders, cool, calm, and as if in no way changed or affected by that which he had just heard."You will hold yourself at our convenience, Mr. MacIntyre," he began, " and I hope you will be pre-

pared to make an oath to your assertions. As for the letter, that is in any possession, and has been from the first. I think you will have no cause to criticise our diligence in this affair," and I caught a grim smile beneath his big moustache.There was not another scrap of testimony of the least value to be gathered from hours of questioning. Mike's wife could throw no light upon the subject, and nothing remained but to bury the dead with due pomp and circumstance, and in due time, and then to sit down and await the recovery of Jack Braddock.I had left him in Roxy's care while I came out to witness the preliminary work of the chief and the coroner, which had neither surprised nor disappointed me in its results, or lack of results, and as I turned my steps homeward I began to study the situation.But my meditation was brief, for a footstep, close behind me, gave me that peculiar feeling of being pursued that comes sometimes, and then, before I could look around, a voice close behind me said:" Don't turn your head, Mr. Masters. It's Tom Hall. And I very much wish for a long talk with you. Let me come alongside for just a moment, and you speak first."Ire was beside me with the word, his head bent, as if his only thought was to forge past me, and I turned and put out a hand.He looked up and walked beside me for a moment, then, with a brief nod, fell into step beside me. But meantime he had surprised me." Mr. Masters," he began, the moment we were fairly abreast, " I must see you, and it must be secretly--at least, where Mac is concerned ! Do you watch to-night ? "" Yes--until midnight at least.""And--who then ? "" The judge claims it then.""And can you admit me to your room, say at two o'clock? I would like at least an hour! " his voice was that of a new man. And I repliedYes ; come earlier if you like."Not until two. I can't. Thanks ! "CHAPTER XXII
FLIGHT DELAYEDMy mind was full of Sydney Starr and her horrible position. Dare we, could we send her away that very night ? If guilty or innocent we hardly dare ask or know, or judge, and yet, with that awful charge hanging over her, something must be done--and that soon.It was high noon when I entered Roxy's door, and she met me with a finger on her lip."Jack's quiet," she whispered, "an' loin' well, the doc' says. But--come this way, sor--Miss Sydney, poor child, is all of a shiver with hearin' the awful goin' on, an' she wants to see you, sor."I had decided the moment I heard of Mike's charge, and the lost letter--for all who heard of it judged it at once to refer to Sydney Starr and one of the Mortons--not to seek her, but to await her action and further developments, and we had decided also, the judge and I, that she must know the situation." We have no right to spirit her out of town--even if we could, which I doubt--without telling her of the danger that threatens her. And Roxy must tell her the truth," said the judge.To our surprise and increased respect for this good soul, Roxy agreed with us. " She's got a brave heart in her," she declared, "and an innocent sowl, I'd swear to ut ! Yes, I'll tell her, poor dear, though it's worse than walkin' into purgitory."When the door opened and Sydney Starr walked in I started back, and I knew that she had been told.Was this the Sydney Starr we had known? I had seen her in many places, but never like this; and I think my face must have revealed my thought. But she held out her hand to me, and I could see the challenge in her eyes. It was a test, and as I grasped the hand in mine it fluttered just a little.I might have questioned Sydney Starr yesterday. To-day I sat before her, and waited her command." You have been very kind to me, Mr. Masters," she began, after a moment of silence, "and I wish to tell you all that I know about the events of this morning. And to begin, I may say that I have been to some extent the victim of a plot. I don't understand its exact nature, but I understand enough." Last night, as I was about to enter the theatre," she went on, " a man in a rough old soldier's uniform stopped me and laid a note in my hand, turning away before I could speak. I opened it in my drawingroom, sorely tempted as I was to fling it away unread. But that was not to be. It was signed `Philip Morton,' and begged me to meet him directly after the close of the theatre. ' Something has happened of which you must know,' it said, 'and I implore you, for your own sake, for Hubert's sake, for my sake, to come,' and he named the place of meeting, adding, 'Someone must have overheard our talk in Box 10.' We had had a quarrel, you must know, one night at the theatre--"Something in my face must have stopped her, for she paused, and I said hastily: "Miss Sydney, I overheard that talk, and Mike was with me. I begin to see." I stopped short."And I begin to understand--many things!" she

said. "It was a plot, the plot of that (lead man! lie hated me, and when he knew that I was slipping through his hands, he planned to avenge himself and destroy me ! You may think me a monster, but when I think of it all--I--I cannot feel myself as a murderess.""Miss--Starr ! " I cried."Yes," she went on steadily. "It was I who killed him! But it was in self-defence. When we met, and his voice revealed him, I turned to run away. He caught me and began to talk. I could not bear to cry out and so reveal my horrible plight, and when he began to urge me to promise to remain, and to finish my contract, I feigned to listen and to consider, and I slipped from my bodice the little pistol I have carried there every night since I have been in this awful place. He claimed to know the story of my past, and threatened me with arrest--prison--and worse. Ah, there's no use in telling you all of his baseness I When I was sure that no pity could move him to release me, I did not cry out, but struggled fiercely--and when he hissed, 'Come on!' with a curse, and I knew that aid was coming to him--I--fired ! "" But," I said, " there was Braddock, you know, and he was shot too."" I know ! Someone, I suppose, was trying to kill me, and in the darkness it was not surprising he struck at the wrong figure."I did not tell her that this was doubtless Pony Jack, and the next moment she asked : " Is Jack desperately hurt. I thought--better things of him."" Don't judge him too harshly. He loved you, and he was told that you were going out to meet Philip

Morton. Mike showed him the letter you lost" This was a feeler." Lost ! Put I lost no letter! I had that letter in my hand and put it away--only a little time ago. Ah ! ""Yes ; it was all a plot, and Alike, no doubt, wrote the letters, both of them. The one to decoy you out, the other to set Jack upon the war-path. It looks as if he depended upon Jack to play into his hands."" Perhaps he hoped he might kill--the lieutenant," she said, with her face averted. " Or be killed himself."" What! Do you believe that note to have been from Morton ? " I exclaimed." Why ? " she put her hand to her head in bewilderment, but I could see her face brighten. " I see ! But Mike might have bribed the messenger."" Remember the ragged uniform ? The boys at the fort do not wear such. And there are moth-eaten millitary costumes in plenty among Mike's stage wardrobe. No. If you still have your letter, be sure of it, they are both forgeries."She got up quickly. " I must know! " she said, and went out swiftly, erect and defiant.Just outside I heard her utter a sharp exclamation, and springing to the door, I saw Roxy standing, as in doubt, near the entrance, and Philip Morton just behind her."Come back ! " I said in a whisper, and then to Morton, " Come in, lieutenant." He came at once, but Sydney Starr, without glancing at him, sped past us both and up the stairs. Morton turned to me at once." The chief of police sent for me a short time ago, and showed me a note--a d--d note! asking if I had

written it, and when I had disowned it, he was good enough to say that he had not believed me capable of that, and he told me the whole story--as he knew it. God ! I pity that poor girl ! ""Thank you, Mr. Morton! Where man pities, God surely will! Look at this, please "--she had returned in time to hear the last words--" and tell me if you know it."" I know it," he said gravely, "as a forgery for which a bad man has answered with his life. I could almost wish that it had been my hand that saved a woman from his vile clutch."He took the letter from her hand and ran his eyes over it again. " The creature has even planned and prepared the way for her to drop into his trap! " he said, and for a moment we saw in his face what he might be when fully aroused." What shall you do with this ? " he asked." That letter must be preserved," I remarked. "The proof that there was a plot to entrap Miss Starr is in those duplicate letters ! "The lieutenant took up his hat. "You know that you can count upon me--upon us--to stand by you--to fight your battle--if it comes to that--I mean lawfully, of course.""You are very good," she said quietly. "But it will not be needful. I shall plead guilty--at once. Yes," as the lieutenant's eyes widened in horror. " It should not surprise you ! I shot the man ! It was his life or mine, and I shall give myself up!And then regardless of secrecy I spoke, resolutely, and as one with authority."That you shall not! Do you realise, Miss Starr, what that would mean ? Not only for yourself, but for others ? "" I am afraid not," she said." Listen ! There can be no accurate knowledge of this affair until Jack Braddock is able to testify. And to admit anything now would be to condemn yourself to the town jail for weeks, perhaps ! Besides, let this become known, and the facts of these letters that have not been made public must become known. Do you not see what this means? The horrible tales? The scandal ? With Jack to help us--""To help us? Mike's tool?"" No, not his tool ! Braddock went to that place hot with jealousy, as I have already told you. But seeing you in danger, he sprang to your assistance." I do not yet know whether he at first knew your assailant, or thought it was Morton here ; but he struck for you, and the knife-wound in Mike's shoulder was dealt by Jack."" Then"--her eyes now wide with horror--" I shot them both ? "" That does not follow. Perhaps there was a third man there ? "" It seemed so then. Now I think it was merely a fancy, and the double report an echo.""Your pistol," suggested Morton, "where is that?"" My pistol ! " She started. " I had not thought of it. I think I must still be a little dazed.""No wonder," murmured Morton." At the moment of the discharge we were all very close together. Someone snatched the pistol from my hand. Has it been sound ? "I shook my head. " No, at least I think not. And once again, Miss Starr, can you not see that to denounce yourself now would force the chief to let something be known about these letters, and that would mean the dragging of Lieutenant Morton's

name into the affair. In fact, it is just what Mike's friends would like, for they arc trying hard to work up an ugly feeling among the worst element--Mike's element. Your story, as you would have to tell it, would be opposed by something like this : Mike, interfering in your behalf, was shot, if not by you, then by Morton; and while I do not think you would have much to fear from a mob of lynchers, Morton here, who is not popular among the roughs, would become the target for their fury."The town is full of Mike's henchmen, and any outbreak, any outrage is possible, with this affair to give it an excuse." In deciding this matter, Miss Starr, you are deciding for the good or ill of others than yourself! While if we can keep the people just wondering and talking, until Jack recovers, he is the man upon whom we all depend. He holds the key to the situation, I believe; and he will never use it to your hurt."The girl's head was bowed."Not even," she said presently, " when he knows that I shot him ? He does know it, does he not ? " I nodded."But--Mike Aiken accused me," she faltered." Alike was dying, and his mind might not have been clear; that is the idea that your friends are agitating, and the fact that no weapon was found, except Braddock's, gives probability to this story. You have played a part in your own interest, Miss Starr--pardon me for saying it."" It is true," she said simply, " and now you wish me to play another part for myself and others ? "" We all wish you to protect yourself. At least, do not speak until Jack Braddock tells his story."She sighed wearily. " I am in your hands," she said. " Instruct me, and I will assume my role; but I had hoped that my day of acting was over for ever ! " She half turned away, and did not see the start and the look of surprise which the lieutenant seemed unable to suppress. Then she turned back, and asked, " What do you advise me to do? "" Remain indoors and see as few people as possible. The chief will call upon you for form's sake. Tell him the story of the note--the decoy, everything, except the shooting. You are not supposed to have had a weapon--remember ; and if the chief does not question closely, this point can be easily avoided."She turned to the lieutenant and looked him full in the face." Does the chief of police know ? " she asked him in low but firm tones.Not--to my knowledge," he replied. "Does--anyone ? "" Miss Starr," I interposed, " if anyone does, I am not aware of it, and I do not think it; and now this talk should not be prolonged. We cannot be too cautious."When Miss Starr had passed out and up the stairs, the lieutenant turned to me." It looks," said the lieutenant, as Miss Starr went out, " as if the plans for to-night had been given up."" They had to be ! Roxy told her the truth, for we could not send her away in ignorance of her danger ; and when she knew it, she refused to go."" Of course ! " he said absently." And why ` of course' ? " I questioned, " if, as you believe, she is--"" What she is, we have seen. Whatever she may have been, unfortunate, criminal if you will, has been

as the result of wrongs or misfortune, beyond the common ; and let her be whatever else she may, she is, as we know, a brave woman, a generous one, and one who somewhere, somehow, has had opportunities and associations beyond those of most young women, and she has known how to profit by them all ! "She is not the only person stranded upon this western sand-bar who knows how to be generous," I said.To which the lieutenant replied " Pshaw ! " and went out hurriedly.CHAPTER XXIII
THE DEACON UNMASKSTHE midnight which would have seen Sydney on her way back to civilisation found her alone in her room at Roxy's, saying to the few who had won their way past Roxy's vigilance : " I have nothing to say. I have been instructed to say nothing of this terrible affair until Jack Braddock is able to be examined. Then I shall be glad to speak ! "We had gone over the ground, the chief and I, and we had agreed upon most points of the theories that seemed in any degree tenable." I think," said Barry, " that Aiken had planned for an abduction ; things seem to point that way First, there's his directions in that decoy letter : `No one must know.' If his plans had succeeded, she would simply have disappeared, and if he could not secure the captive alive, then there was the knife or pistol. He would have his revenge ; and then--well, dead people tell no tales ! "I had brought with me the duplicate letter which Miss Starr lead yielded to my hands with strange reluctance, and I now proposed that we compare them. "They're alike, no doubt," I said carelessly, and laid them before me side by side." I'd like to know how Jack came by that ? " said Barry, looking over my shoulder. " You read them, Masters, my eyes are poor--rather."" Jove," I broke out, " they're not alike, and there's a difference in length of--see--five lines."Yes--six. Listen. In the one sent to Miss Sydney he closes, 'Be there sharp, at the moment. It's a quiet place, and safe for our talk. I know you are going away. Not a moment later than 4.2o by your own watch--the theatre clock varies.' That's enough of that & The one you took from Jack's pocket reads like this: ` Don't come before 4.35 ; I can't arrive a moment earlier, and should you see a single person anywhere, except at the spot, pass on and I will follow. Remember, not too soon, and close by the Higgins woman's wall. Wear nothing light except a strip of something white about one arm, to be visible should it be too cloudy."'I looked up here. "Ah," I said, " I see ! You have caught on ! Mike and Jack were at loggerheads, having had differences about some matter for two weeks and more. Mike had it in for Jack, and Jack wants a good chance at Phil Morton--I don't know why."" I do! Jack deserted about five years ago. Only a few knew it, and nobody cares. But it's a good whip in the hands of a soldier--though there were extenuating circumstances--and the matter was settled.""I see!" I mused over this a moment; then, "That's it, then; Morton has first humiliated him, and then, seemingly, won the good-will of the woman he, Jack, really admires, I believe."" It's a solid case," agreed Barry. " Well, go on!" That's about all. You observe that the letter fixed up for Jack reads as if it were from a lover. The other is distinctly cool. Aiken knows that what hate alone may not accomplish, hate and love will. Hence this letter for Jack's undoing. Now, stir up your imagination. Mike has told two of his men, in the hearing of

others, that he is going out to see a sick man taking the bottle is a cunning and realistic trick." Barry laughed."Mike, let us say, arrives on time, so does she. Some moments are passed in argument, and Jack is due. Just here let me interpolate--tied about a post, close to the south wall of Roxy's house--which would be the north wall from the lot below it : tied there, then, is a strip of white cotton, as I observed this morning while looking about me. That was to mislead Jack, who would go toward it, stop and wait." The critical moment arrives, and all might have been different but for the fact that Jack, strong in his faith in his own skill as an Indian stalker, goes before the appointed hour."At first, the white rag and the darkness beguile him, but the moment comes when he hears a struggle and flings himself into the fray, with the result that Mike found his plot miscarry. His ally appears, for I have no doubt of the presence, at the last, of a third man upon the scene. One of Mike's tools, of course--this man must have blundered somehow, and--well, we know the result. The arch-plotter and would-be abductor lies dead. Now, was the shot that hit Mike meant for Sydney Starr ? And was Jack's wound dealt him by Mike, or the other person ?"" Miss Starr--" Barry began." Miss Starr," I broke in, " never shot two men with a toy pistol ! Besides, how can we know how many weapons, besides Miss Starr's, were carried from the field? Do you want my opinion ? "" Certainly! "" Then this third and unknown quantity was brought there to shoot Jack Braddock, just as Jack was enticed there to shoot--Morton."And--Miss Starr ? ""You know Mike Aiken ! Do you think he would trust his prize to other hands, once he had it in his own possession ? "" Zounds, man! I believe you are right!" cried Barry."Time," I replied, " and Jack Braddock will tell."The Deacon arrived prompt to the minute, his face wearing a broad grin." I had to dope Mac'," he said nonchalantly, as he seated himself and crossed his legs. " I owed it to him ; he got me first.""Do you mean that he drugged you?""He did that ! and at a very critical time." When ? "This morning. He got me up to the bar at Mike's at about half-past three. I guess it was all fixed. Mike was too slick."" Well ?" I said suggestively."I heard," he began, "that you were about to choose a helper in your task of night nurse. I'd like the post!"" Oh, I see ! Then Mac' did send you, eh?"" Mac's asleep, as I said before;" he paused to extract something from an inner pocket. "That will explain," and he tossed me a letter crumpled from much carrying.I started, and looked at the letter, which provoked from me a long whistle, for I recognised upon the envelope the handwriting of my chief at New York.The letter was brief and to the point, as follows" MY DEAR FELLOW,--This will come into your hand at the right time, and will introduce a good fellow, and a useful, Jerry Graves, alias `Tom Hall,' alias for this occasion, ' the Deacon.'" Knowing your liking for an untrammelled billet and that you never `hunt in couples,' and knowing at the same time the aid a good watch-dog might prove at a pinch, I have sent out Graves, who has been working in the city four straight years, and will take this western jaunt as a picnic--the very thing he wants,in fact. His orders are to stick to MacIntyre, and to play into your hands, but not to make himself known unless he sees a time when you can't cover the ground alone, or he can't get on without aid. In which case he reports to you, and awaits your instructions. For further details apply to 'the Deacon.'--Yours, hoping for your success,	" KEATING."It did not require much thought or time to comprehend the situation, and surely an assistant could not have appeared at a more convenient season, for I had already resolved that I would not abandon the judge, and Roxy, and the rest of Sydney Starr's friends, would stand by Sydney Starr, with the rest.I did not for a moment doubt the man's good faith. In fact, I knew the name, if not the face. Graves was listed at headquarters as the best of close and steady shadowers, and I put out my hand, saying, " Shake upon it, Hall ! " and then, after a second glance at the letter, and a moment's thought : "Time's short, you know, and I am a vane. We will take the details in instalments. But first, you don't propose to quit MacIntyre--now ? "That's for you to say. My judgment says--No."" And mine also! Now, details first. How came you to be Tom Hall? "He held a packet of papers half open in his hand--the same from which he had extracted the chief's letter--and he now silently proffered me a newspaper clipping.It told, in brief, of the arrest of one Tom Hall, lately from the west, and suspected to be one of a gang of train robbers and burglars, lately disbanded in Colorado, and now charged with an attempt to hold up a way station in the suburbs. It was a " first mention," as we called such items, and I gave it back, saying:I saw that at the time. It gave me added faith in the belief current at the office, that you were both getting ready for a new try at the express and mails."" Cert' ! Ye see the fellow Hall had a letter on him that gave away enough to let us know that he was lying off to double up with MacIntyre, to get some points about the road, and especially to run over it once or twice, and then come west and strike out. Hall was about my size, and he and MacIntyre had never met. It seems the fellow has some decent people back east, and he began a howl, and to deny the name. Said he had given the police the first name he could think of--a fellow he had met on the 'Frisco train. As this was playing right into the chief's hands, they pretended to swallow the story, and having for once plenty of 'proof'--parties who swore to the face--he was sent to the island, and I studied up the part, and thus far have been quite a successful train robber--off duty. You see this Hall was not much known out here. He belonged at the eastern end of the string, but they have had to make so many changes of late, owing to arrests, and getting too well known, that, so far, I've had to run very little risk,"Afterward I learned what the man had really hazarded and escaped ; and that it was to him that we owed the tangle into which he had gotten, and kept, their plans.Thus far he had thwarted any definite and secure action, having been made a go-between for Mac' at Cheyenne and the others farther up in the hills. I had been thinking while he talked, and now I asked" How long since you observed this resemblance between Mike Aiken and MacIntyre ? "" Ever since I saw the two together."" And that is how long? "" Ever since Mac' and I have been together." " You know something more, I think?"He nodded." Had I better hear it now ? "" I think so. You see, MacIntyre kept up a hot correspondence with Mike while we were east, and as I was a rather slow and sleepy chap, especially about bed-time, and as he had been told that I was `all right,' he soon began to be a bit careless ; and I soon got at his mail. Now here it is in a nut-shell: Mike and Mac' were brothers ! ""Phew!"" And they belong to the same gang." This was not so surprising. " Since they've been iii the same town I've been out of their confabs mostly, for Mike made up in caution what the other lacks. But I'm inclined to think Mac' was in this shooting affair, though I can't place him."I started. Here was my unknown third man. I pondered for a moment. " We won't go into details now concerning this brother business. I do not doubt the facts. Nature is a very good witness in these cases. There's another thing, Hall--shall I call you that ?"" It's safest," he assented." I wonder what you know about the lady in the cottage out on the north road ! " I could see by the

twinkle of his now wide-awake eyes that he was interested here, and could not help exclaiming" Zounds, man ! you are an artist in the trick of eliminating all life and intelligence from your face at will. You have looked to me absolutely stupid at all times. But go on about the lady."" It's an easy trick to do, after a little practice," he said, with a short laugh. "About the lady, now. Well, I read that telegram over Mac's shoulder, and it was I who filched it, dropped it, and told the bell boy to take it to you."" But--" I began." I know; I told the lad to say it was the clerk, lest you think he and I had taken liberties with it. Well, I saw what was up. There was a pretty woman back east that Mac' seems to have been struck on for a couple of years, and it was this that kept him so quiet in New York. He didn't seem to prosper much at first, but towards the last she seemed to soften a bit, and I figured it that he had been just playing the friendly act, and that she was quite a swell, and held herself away over his head." One day I got my paw upon one of her letters ; it was just a few days before we were to come back here, and it appeared she had just learned this fact. It was very neatly done. She's a clever woman, and she managed to let him know that she would like nothing better than a chance to 'go west.' She would miss him, and so on, but she wouldn't come out in his company. Then there came another letter. She would like to come--after a few days, and if she might live secluded, and look about her quietly. Well, she came ! "" Yes, I saw her once." Hall was grinning. " Did you ? " I questioned." I did."" Do you think anyone else did ? "" Yes. Pony Jack was on the trail, too." " Do you know why? "" No, but I fancy it's Mac' that he's piping." " Do you know this woman? " " Not by name. I've seen her." " Without her veil? "" Without her hat. She's a plum beauty."" How did you manage that? "" Well, I scraped acquaintance with the lady of the house--Green by name ; and--well, money talks with these boarding-house ladies, especially if it is offered as a sort of tribute to their landlady-like charms; and besides, my sad story interested her. I was most anxious to avoid a certain person who would like to clean me out in order to possess my rich claim, and when this party came in from the wilds, I had to lie low. See ? "" Yes. It's very pathetic."" So she thought. She had no room to give me, no pleasant room ; but for purposes of hiding there was the attic. It was right above the front room--the lady's room, you know--and it could only be reached by a ladder-like stairway out of the kitchen. If I didn't mind the back door and a mattress upon the rafters, there were loose boards here and there, etc., etc. It suited me, and I made my first visit by daylight--and the landlady took me up openly. I wanted to find a leak in the roof, she told her only lodger. But I guess you don't care for any more `details.' Mac' didn't go out there often ; she would not allow it; and their meetings were not joyful. He fairly cringed before her, and he seemed to know something about her that she called her `one horrible

mistake,' her `crime,' for which she was now being punished. Then it came out that she had wanted to come out west because of some man, and--just like a woman--when she stood about one chance in eighty-six of finding him, she was wild to run the chance. But one day she learned somehow that this party was near, and she could see him if she chose to send for him. And then she was in a blue funk ; she wanted to see him, and she was afraid to meet him. And while Mac' would talk soft to her, and offer to go and find him and bring him there, I could see that he was getting ugly inside."" Jealous ? "" Yes, and aching to take it out of somebody."And how do they stand at present ? "Things are still mixed. The woman is certainly unhappy, and when Mac' goes away she walks the floor, and wrings her hands, and calls herself hard names, and says `it was all her fault,' and that `she did not trust him then, and he never can trust her now.' "" And you hear no names ? "" No. It's only 'he' and `they."'"And is there anything else? Any talk of money?"" Of money?--no. But--yes ! Twice there has been mention of some jewels. At first he spoke of them, saying, `Those diamonds, you know--I told you you should have them back--and you shall!' 'When?' she asked anxiously. `When I come again,' he said. But when he went next time they were not forthcoming, and she was so greatly disappointed that finally he had to tell her that they had been stolen. Not at first, understand. Ile made his little outcry about his loss first. But at last he had to own up. I've often wondered--" he paused, until I looked up, and directly at him, and then with

twinkling eyes he repeated : "I've wondered what became of them!"I smiled in spite of myself. " Confound you, Deacon!" I said, " I believe you know!""Well," he admitted, " I was not very far from Mac' the night he lost them--or thinks he did. He lays the job to some of Mike's people still. No, I was not very far away when Mac' fell down, and you picked--him up."For just a moment I was small enough to feel chagrin, and then, meeting his friendly, laughing eye, I burst into laughter myself, in which he heartily joined." Upon my soul, Deacon," I said cordially, " the chief ought to have changed our places. You are the man who has done the most and best work. Have done it all, in fact!""Nothing of the sort," he declared earnestly. " Honestly, Mr. Masters, I am no good as a leader. Give me my orders, and I can follow them out. But I couldn't handle all sorts and conditions, as you do. No, sir! I know my place, and my place now is just where you tell me to go."" Your place will be at my right hand," I declared heartily. " You have told me to-night some things that may prove of immense value to me, if not to this case. There, I knew this would surprise you, and I am going to give you my entire confidence in all that concerns this MacIntyre business, and in another case. I mean to confide in you whenever I can, without giving out other people's secrets ; and to begin--I don't know how you stand about this murder, but if you stand with me, it must be to protect--some who will be accused. I can't talk longer now. To-morrow we will meet somehow, and I will explain in further detail ; for the present, stick close to Mac', and if you can get at his weapons, do so."CHAPTER XXIV
THE GIRL FROM PARISWE had almost dreaded the funeral, for the widow of the dead man, who had been a vixen all her life, now bewailed him, and called upon all who had ever named him friend to avenge his death by hunting down his assassin.Having noted the exchange of signals, and the hasty drawing apart of officer Smith and MacIntyre, I expected what soon came about : First, the fleeting rumour that Mike with his last breath had denounced Sydney Starr as the cause, and Lieutenant Morton as the actual perpetrator of the deed.This was startling. But in the light of Hall's revelation, I at once fixed upon MacIntyre as the author and instigator of what was really a cunning mixture of truth and fiction." I can see the fellow's game," the chief said. " By this jumble of fact and fancy he hopes to force our hand, for no doubt MacIntyre knows just what Aiken's plans were, and that Jack had that duplicate letter, which of course means Mac' knows that I now have it. He wants it made public."" No doubt. And now, as it looks to me, MacIntyre is our game," I answered. " But it won't do to arrest him yet."" No," assented the chief, " not yet." And then he added : " I had better tell you at once, Masters, that I have sent for Smith, and had it out with him. I

felt sure there was something back of his careful avoidance of the office and all the other men since he reported the finding of the two bodies." I first reprimanded him severely for accepting a bribe, and then, after condoning this offence, I took him into my confidence by hinting at some wonderful developments to come, and sent him away with his mouth really close--I think--this time."" Would you like my theory about Mike's antemortem statement ? " I asked." Of course ! I have been wondering what it could be."" It is this : Smith's statement declares that in bending over Mike he saw the knife-wound on his shoulder. Before he has discovered the other, and more serious, hurt, he declares to Mike that the wound is not a dangerous one, and indicates the place. Mike, defeated and wounded, catches at the officer's question, `Who cut you ?' Now, his plot was to get possession of Sydney Starr, and by some means prevent her leaving town, and coerce her to return to his stage. The scoundrel was quick of wit, and he replied to the query `Who cut you? ' ' Sydney Starr.' Of course, she would be detained, he would reason--probably arrested ; but her departure would surely be delayed. Then came that gush of blood from the other wound, and what Mike Aiken said, believing himself still in the game, must stand until the resurrection."" By Jove ! " cried the chief briskly, " I believe you're right. At all events, so long as Miss Starr remains quietly under our eyes, she will not be disturbed by me--not yet."On the morning of the third day since the closing

of Mike's theatre and the death of its proprietor, I came in from the post-office arid sat down by my window to examine my mail. It was soon disposed of, except two letters, both thick, and one sending out a faint fragrant odour. I lifted it to my nostrils, and nodded as I sniffed at the satin surface. "Heliotrope," I murmured, and laid the letter carefully and slowly down, taking up' the remaining one with a brisk, business-like touch. It was from the eastern office, and before looking at the written lines, I caught up the two cards which fell from within, and began to study them. There were two faces, handsome both ; rather there was one face, the same upon each card--the one a picture with full face toward me, wide open and upraised eyes and smiling lips, the typical picture of the popular actress ; the other was a profile, simpler and, to my mind, more attractive. A small fur cap adorned the head ; a mannish stock was drawn high about the throat. I looked at them long, and when I put them down I muttered to myself in a way I had, the result of much solitary meditation : " I was sure of it 1 It's the same face, but with a difference which may be the fault of the artist. And now I must see the face of the woman in the cottage, and the Deacon must help me." Already I was beginning to pin my faith upon the Deacon.And then, putting the cards aside, and face downward, I cut open the last letter with precision, and put its outer cover carefully beside me upon the table, quite by itself.It was a long letter, and it also contained an enclosure. This was not a photo, but a little watercolour sketch, and I saw at a glance that it had been made by an artist of no mean skill. But this I put

aside, after a brief survey, and returned to the letter. It was post-marked Santa Barbara, and was signed, " Cordially your friend,--LETTICE E. CAROLYN."Since our meeting in Santa Barbara, frequent letters had been exchanged between Mrs. Carolyn and myself ; but while at first they had been written on behalf of Allan Eversoll, who was still too ill to wield a pen, they had some time since abandoned that little fiction, and were now the letters of very good friends, for when two people have so much in common, friendships between them are of rapid growth.If it had ever occurred to me to wonder at the sudden change in Mrs. Carolyn's belief or hopes, where the lost Mrs. Eversoll was concerned, I certainly asked myself no such question now. I only knew that Mrs. Carolyn loved her brother, and felt that his return to health seemed to hang upon the mere chance that his wife might be alive.Mrs. Carolyn's letter need not be quoted in full, but as it neared the end I read these words:"Since you asked me to filch the picture from Allan, I have tried to devise a way to get you what you want, and still leave to him what is so obviously his sole treasure and great comfort, and I have finally induced him to let me make a copy of it in oils. It is from this copy that I have stolen time to paint the little picture which, I may say, is a very fair likeness of Allan's wife." I hardly see what need of it you can have just now, but if you really think it will be wise even now to send out copies with the `private instruction' you told me of, you shall have it." The scraps of writing I have, after long search, managed to find, and in asking for these you have again puzzled me." And now about our coming east. Allan is more

than eager to go east, and to meet you en route. He even declares his strong wish to go in advance, and spend a few days in a place that will be new to us both, a real wild western town, that is still in its state of ferment, its boom ! But it must be only on condition--Allan says--that you be ready and willing to go east with us when we have exhausted the sights, and seen the wild animals go through their manoeuvres. Do you know, we have both become quite interested in that beautiful young actress, and her troubles and triumphs; she certainly must be an uncommon character ! Quite unique--I should say."I smiled as I read this last sentence. I had written some account of Sydney Starr--never, of course, by name, simply as an unusual character to be found in such a place. Perhaps I fancied that it might interest Allan; perhaps--but no matter.And now, at last, I gave myself time to re-read the chief's letter."MY DEAR MASTERS" (it ran), " I have had one of the men looking up the matter you wrote of, and I'm blessed if I can see what that pretty French actress, who set half Paris crazy a couple of years ago, can have to do with MacIntyre and train robbing? Is she, by any chance, one of the band ? However, knowing your method, I'll say no more, but forward the two pictures of mademoiselle. Don't let her stick a knife into you !" About the other matter, your instructions about the data are being carried out, and Simpson is writing them up with great care. They will follow soon. 'The Deacon' has just wired me that he has 'kicked off his shell,' and that ' everything is lovely.' Ha ! ha!- Yours cordially,	" KEATING."The Deacon, as I shall continue to call him, had

publicly proffered himself as assistant nurse, at need, and I had kicked, and after kicking submitted." It's a lovely arrangement," said the Deacon, when he came in shortly after. " Ye see, MacIntyre's been awful anxious to know all about Pony Jack's sickness, but he don't want to come near him for some reason--says he can't stand a sick-room, and never could. So I suggested that one of us ought to db the neighbourly, and after that Mac' gave me no rest until I had offered my services, and now I'm to take him a full report every night."" Do," I urged, with a grin.We separated, and after giving myself another glance at my Santa Barbara letter, I went to confer again with Miss Starr.As she sat opposite me, I studied her face with renewed interest, and when I was again alone I compared these last and freshest impressions with the two pictures sent me from New York. The resemblance was certainly extraordinary.Next day I saw Lieutenant Morton, and lost no time in making my first attempt to test my theory, by showing him the pictures of the Parisian actress.Of course, you have no doubt that this woman and Miss Starr are one and the same ? " I questioned, as I put the cards in his hand." Do I understand that these are the pictures sent from Paris in the first case ?"I nodded."And there can be no possibility of a mistake?"" Hardly !	Do you notice a strong enough resemblance after all?"" A resemblance--yes ! but"--and he again held up the two pictures--" these are not pictures of the young woman I saw in Paris--Francine Luvoise."" Not !--and you are positive?"" This is not the face ; it is not Francine, the French player ! ""And--Miss Starr ? ""And Miss Starr is," he declared gravely--"I'd give something to doubt it, but I cannot--the woman who now calls herself Miss Starr is the woman whom I saw in Paris !--the woman accused of--"Of--killing her lover ! "Yes. Why, man, if I did not feel certain before, I was compelled to believe that day at the races ! Why, Masters, the dress she wore that day is the very same she wore when I saw her riding in the Bois de Boulogne ! "CHAPTER XXV
THE INTERVIEW AT "MISS GREEN'S "ON the morning of the fifth day after the shooting, Mike Aiken's body was buried, the funeral ceremony being at the theatre." It's the place he liked best," his wife declared, when remonstrance was ventured on, "an' it's the place where the boys'll come to look at him, an' think how they may hunt down the wan that killed him ! They won't need to hunt far ! "" For devilish spite," said Chief Barry, " commend me to what historians call ` a woman of the people'! "" By which," I added, " they mean simply an uneducated woman who is born and bred, often, in the wilds; a primitive human animal who loves, hates, and takes revenge, like the tigress--or worse, the bags of the Paris Commune! "" You have said it," declared Barry ; "and look! this town is filled with Mike's hirelings, his tools, who for a drink and a meal will do any dirty deed in which each can hide behind the next, and find strength in numbers.""You mean," I cried, " a mob?"" What else ? From the first this woman has worked to create a sentiment, a feeling against the weakest victim. My men have reported it as growing all over the town, and they are already keeping tab

upon various groups of ringleaders, who are steadily drawing together the worst element in the place." I've got to hold them level with a steady hand, and a strong one. You know the strength of' my force ? " and he laughed. " Our people run this town upon a cheap plan, and save expense by looking for help in time of trouble, where we may have to look--yet.""You mean--?""I mean the barracks, the colonel and his merry men, and there's bad blood already between the boys in blue and the town roughs. I'm sorry for it now.""Now?" I turned upon him swiftly. "Barry, what are you driving at ? "" Simply this : The boys told me that already it is being whispered about that I am not running straight. That I am standing in to help out the girl, and keep the case from getting the overhauling that is all it needs, so they think to make out a case strong enough to demand an arrest. Yes, it's no use ; the rumour's got out good and strong ; nobody knows who has the knowledge at first hand, but it's out, and it's a lusty and growing belief that Mike accused Miss Starr; and that is not all. The story of the letter, garbled and made as bad as possible, is also on the wing, and travelling and growing. You see where it must lead ? "I nodded, and he went on gravely" Have you seen much of the judge for a day or two? No! I thought not. He's a busy man, I can tell you, here, there, everywhere ; and if the theatre faction are manufacturing opinions, so is he. Also, there is a strong party, the same that stood by Miss Starr in her first trouble, ready to stand by her now as long as it is a mob that is threatening her safety.They have a theory, too, and it keeps the gang uncertain and a little bit afraid to speak out, as it were. Still, unless something unexpected turns up very soon, I shall have to make some sort of a statement about that letter. They know it's in my hands, and we may have to put Miss Starr under arrest, or, at least, under bonds ! ""Have you any plans ? " I asked, with a growing fear." Only these : The boys are posted, and it will be known that I intend to talk to the crowd from the courthouse steps to-night. Well, I will not appear too early, and when my lads have had time to feel their temper, I shall know what to say to the gang. At least, I shall know how much or little I can say safely. I might divert their thoughts a bit by just hinting at that third party, and very vaguely at Mac'.""Good!" I said. "Go ahead."" There's one other thing"' he said, as we were about to separate, " I think Miss Starr should be warned; she should know what she may have to face later." "She knows it," I assured him. " She is quite prepared, and very calm and courageous."That evening, from earliest lamplight, a crowd was moving restlessly to and fro in the streets, and certain prominent mischief - breeders could be observed hurrying from group to group. Not far behind them moved the chief's men, while the judge and his faithful henchmen, Jersey Pete, Tom and Jerry, Jim Griggs, and a score of others were here, there, and everywhere, dropping their word in season wherever they saw fallow or even debatable ground. The Deacon was on duty at the bedside of Pony Jack.As for myself, I was drifting here and there at the heels of MacIntyre.These days were full of anxiety, but the Deacon was my mainstay and hope, and he justified my highest expectations. In the first place, he managed to get Nell Green's permission to let me hide in his attic on the night when Mac' had arranged to see the veiled woman.Before I went there I witnessed Chief Barry's harangue to the mob that was surging around the streets, worked up to a dangerous mood by the liberal distribution of Mike's liquor by the order of his widow.The uproar was at its height when the chief of police came out upon the balcony above the town house entrance, and the simultaneous illumination of the little balcony by torches and big lanterns made him at once a conspicuous and central figure.At sight of him the clamour hushed itself and became instead a low and steady hum, and then, as the word ran round, " The chief," and " Cap' Barry, boys," he lifted his hand to command silence, and they became suddenly still. His talk was brief. He began by reminding them of the duty of good citizens at such an hour, and lie scored a point against them by grimly expressing his surprise at so much noise, just after they had buried "one who had been known as a friend to so many, and for whom so many had expressed friendship," and then he went boldly into the case."At this time," he said, "it is very important that you, each and all, govern your speech and hold judgment in check. If you think that his death, which we all deplore, can be explained by merely saying that he was shot by an enemy, and then pointing out that enemy, you are much mistaken! "There is a rumour afoot that the dead man, with his last breath, accused a certain person whom I shall not name. My friends, this is premature, to say the least. The officer who heard Mike's last words would not be an officer of mine if he could so carelessly distribute evidence broadcast, and if he has uttered some misleading word, to rid himself of troublesome inquiry, you should feel sure that the truth was a long distance from the tale he told or hinted at." Mike Aiken's last words were few, and were spoken by a man who thought himself so little hurt that his mind was more upon others than upon himself, and knowing just what he said, I am led to believe that he had merely begun a sentence when death overtook him, and the precise and full purport of that sentence we, of course, shall never know. We have, however, a clue to his meaning." I have good reason to believe that our friend Mike had seen a letter which gave him anxiety concerning the welfare of one of his people of the theatre. I have that letter in my possession, or where I can lay my hands upon it, and there is more in it than meets the eye at first reading. In short, I believe that the letter says one thing while meaning another. What's that?" lifting his head as a call came across the sea of heads. "Read you the letter! Gentlemen, that letter will not be read, seen, touched, nor its contents known until it comes lawfully before a court, which will try a case that will open all your eyes. I have heard of muttered threats and talk of violence. Don't encourage such madness. I am here to preserve order and to see justice done, and my men are behind me, so also are you, and if, presently, I shall make an arrest, my prisoner will be tried according to law, and we shall have ample protection ; for," and

he waved a tawny envelope aloft, " here is a message, received from the Governor, giving me full authority to call upon every man at the fort, if need me, to help uphold law and order!"Just one word more. Somewhere in this town, in this crowd, it may be, is a person who could tell us all the truth about Mike Aiken's death if he would and dared ; could tell us who fired the shot that killed Mike Aiken and wounded Jack Braddock. This is the man whom you all should seek for. And when we have found him--and we will find him--there will be a trial, and the truth will be known to all the world ! "He bowed courteously, stood for a moment to speak to the judge, and then, as the two went within, I worked my way through the throng near the entrance to reach my quarters, and from there make my way unobserved to Miss Green's cottage.It was just a quarter past eleven when I reached my destination. Mac' had not arrived, but he was not long in coming, and I found that the Deacon had not exaggerated the advantages of his place of espionage.I could hear both voices quite distinctly. It was not an altogether peaceful interview, for she began at once to talk about the lost jewels. At first Mac' tried to temporise, but when she expressed her regret that she had once believed in him or in his friendship, his anger burst forth. He was evidently afraid of her, and was divided between his wrath and his infatuation for her."The fact is," he declared, "you have made a tool of me, and all the while you've been working for your own ends! It was bad enough before, but now, since you've heard of him, and hope to see him--"No, not that! " she cried out. " Only--""Oh! I know you! I'm just beginning to. Lord, what creatures you women are ! After the way that man has served you, and yet you'd go back tomorrow if--""No! " she cried again shrilly."I say yes!" he raged. "But don't be too hopeful. He's a good long way from being a picture of health, let me tell you, madam. And it won't take much to snap that frail heart of his. Oh, I'm posted ! He won't travel for one while, and you--"" I shall go at once. I'll know the truth for myself. How do I know that you have not lied to me. You got me out here--"" Because you jumped at the chance to come. As for going to-morrow, look you, my fine lady, we have been very elegant, and ignored common names and risky topics ; but try to leave this house--try it! When you open that door to go out for good, you will meet a police-officer with a warrant.""And for what? " Her voice was not so firm now."For--well, we won't go back too far into ancient history. We'll say attempted homicide.""Bah ! "" By cutting through the bridle of a certain-- Oh! You do recall the circumstance ? ""You coward!" she hissed. "When this happens, I will invite the officer in to help me remove some of my valuables, among which I especially prize a brace of pistols!"The man ground out an oath."They are not mates, and they are not entirely loaded, but-- Oh! Of course, you have heard that the two bullets from the two wounds are in the hands of the prosecuting attorney ? ""Curse you!" he almost shouted. "Where are they ? ""Oh, softly! If you really wish to have Miss Green hear you, I will call her in.""Miss Green be --! Where are those guns?"Where they will remain until I choose to bring them forth. Yes, Mr. Macintyre, I am tired of this everlasting to-morrow, and I am going to end it ! "CHAPTER XXVI
CONCEALED WEAPONSWHEN I saw the Deacon next day in my room he had a surprise for me. He produced two pistols which he had taken from under a board of the floor in the veiled woman's room. He reported that the bullets in the possession of Chief Barry fitted these two guns, and that they were not ladies' guns. He also promised to procure for me a snap - shot photograph of the veiled woman without the veil.Before he was across my threshold Miss Starr's thin little note was in my hand, and no sooner had the door closed behind him than I sat down to look at it ! I had written to Sydney Starr asking a question which required no prompt answer, and which might have been put on the morrow in person. The question in my note had been simply: "Will you please recall the persons seen by you on the racetrack on the day of the runaway, and tell me if you observed a tall, graceful woman closely veiled, and if so, describe her ; will explain later. This may prove important." This is what I wrote, and her reply, as I had expected, was in the affirmative, followed by an accurate description of the veiled woman.The question and the answer would become important later as evidence, but what I wanted at once, and had obtained, was a specimen of Sydney Starr's handwriting, carelessly and voluntarily written, with

no effort at disguise, and with the result that I was plunged, deeper than ever, into a very labyrinth of mystery.About three o'clock I visited Roxy, and found her pacing the floor and wringing her hands, while a tear stood in either eye.Leading her to a broad couch, I seated her, gently but firmly, and placed myself before her." Roxy," I began in a soothing tone, "you are worried, and I have come here to help you if I can. It is almost morning, and we both need all our rest just now. You must not break down, Roxy, for to the judge and myself you are as our right hands, while to poor Jack and to Miss Starr yon are almost a providence. What is it that troubles you ? "And Roxy lifted her head and dabbed away the tears with vigour as she said"Thank you, Mr. Masters. It ain't often I cry, but I've been that worried, you can't think! I've done an awful piece o' mischief, Mr. Masters, an' that's a fact, an' I don't care how bad you take me or what ugly names ye call me, if only the dear docther'll say I hain't done too much harm. It was this way : I'd been all wrought up wid the hearin' the talk an' the threats about Miss Sydney, bless her, an' I'd just been told by Jerry that Mike had accused that poor child wid his dyin' breath, an' I was sittin' by Jack, and havin' nothin' betther to do, must get up a-cryin', soft like, to mesilf ; when, whoosh, there was that blessed sick b'y a-lookin' at me, an' he says, `What's the cry fur, Roxy ?' Yes, come to himsilf he had, and seemed just loike the old well Jack. `Come here,' says he to me, quick like, ' I've somethin' I must tell ye, Rox, right now. Yis, I know I've been sick, an' it's for fear somethin' might

kape me here a day or two longer. Roxy, yer her friend, ain't ye ? Miss Syd, I mean?' ' Ye bet I am,' I says; an' then he whispers,' That night I thrun a pistol into your cellar windy. When that ball hit me I thought I was done for, an' I just made for the wall o' your house, where the earth was soft, thinkin' to hide the little gun, an' then I fell, an' it happened to be close to your cellar windy, an' it had only a gratin', so I flung it,' he says, 'an' that's the last I know. Ye must get it, Rox,' he says, ' an' then hide it better ; it might make her trouble.' An' thin, sor, what wid the s'prise an' my flurry over the beastly news, I forgot as Jack was a sick man--'deed, he didn't look it then, an' I ups an' tells him the whole story about the b'ys crowdin' in, an' the ugly rumours, an' how it was out that Mike'd accused our Miss Syd ; an' thin all at wanst there was him a-sittin' straight up in the bed an' his eyes jest blazin'. 'Listen!' he yells, `I'll spoil their game! I'm her witness ! An', yer honour an' gentlemen of the jury, that young lady was struggling to defend herself from that devil, and I, Jack Braddock, shot him!' The next minit he falls back, white as the dead, an' I thought for a long hour that I had killed him ! " and again she wept.But it was better than at first we dared to hope. It might prove a slight set-back, the old doctor said, but nothing more, and the sudden outbreak was doubtless owing to the stress of thought upon his mind, coupled with some word or words, perhaps, he caught from Roxy. " Keep your patient quiet, and give your aches as much rest as you can, and a few days will work wonders."A little later, Roxy and I made our way through the rear rooms of her house and through the kitchen,

coming at last to a halt in the outer cellar, which was as yet unfinished, and contained only a pile of coal directly beneath a large window."It's me coal cellar ! " she whispered, " an' this coal here's been lyin' so since the winter past. Lucky 'twas not the front cellar. I don't s'pose annyone 'ud have 'casion to come in here, maybe not afore the fall fires begin to be lit. Mother Mary, look, look! "" Hush! " I whispered, and stumbling across the jetty pile, I saw directly beneath the window a little silver-mounted pistol, a typical woman's weapon." If you don't object, Roxy," I said as we turned to leave the cellar, " I will take charge of this. If it should be inquired for they might look here for it. But I won't be an object of suspicion, and you know I'm a friend of Miss Starr.""I sh'd hope so," sniffed Roxy.CHAPTER XXVII
A SURRENDERTHE steady downpour of rain might have accounted for the decreased excitement among the mob during the next few days, but Chief Barry hinted to me that the real reason might be a different one. He disclosed to me that he had had a suspicion for a long time that Mike Aiken was the ringleader of a large gang of malefactors, and that his death left them without a head. He also told me that he had instructed his men to throw out hints that would add to the puzzles with which the people were wrestling. And he asked me to throw off my reserve and go hand in hand with him more openly, which would also help to mystify the gang.But someone was plotting to keep up the excitement. After two or three days a new rumour was afloat. In spite of the fact that Chief Barry had not lost his letter, purporting to come from Philip Morton, and that Miss Starr still possessed hers, the contents of the " duplicate letter " was known all about town. Not the mere fact that there were duplicates, but that which was far worse.For the rumour had it that Philip Morton had sought to lure Miss Starr away from her friends, and that his motive was to get rid of her in some manner, because of evil influence over his young brother.The story, doubtless, had been concocted by Mike. It was like his wily, far-seeing methods to provide a cloak by which, if his presence at the scene of what was meant to be another man's death became known, he could cover up his real part in the tragedy, and come out the protector and champion of beauty in distress.We knew, too, by this time that the man Utah was active in circulating all these rumours, and stood high, accordingly, in the favour of Mrs. Mike, who had placed him in authority at the bar in the theatre building.This went far to account for the unanimity of opinion held by the throngs that nightly assembled at Mike's, and from thence spread themselves all about the town.That evening another sensation was in the air, and Philip Morton's name was tossed about, and dark hints flew from lip to lip that could be traced to no source."It would do no great harm," said Chief Barry, " as of course they can't back it up if it were not for one thing.""And that?" I questioned." I have just been talking with Lieutenant Morton, and he can't--neither of them can--produce an alibi.""What ! Why, man, there's something wrong here ! "" Not where the Mortons are concerned. I won't believe it."" Nor I."Further I can't say, for I stopped the talk at once. Of course, it won't do for me to be the repository of all these secrets. Anything that may appear in court, of course, but--" He got up and shook his head.He was worried more than he cared to show. " You see the changed position ? " he said. " Even that mob that Utah is keeping in `spirits' would hesitate long before they would turn loose upon a woman. But this--my soul, man! I won't answer for that gang for twenty-four hours! "Suddenly I took a resolution. I had kept Roxy Higgins' story of Pony Jack's declaration, as a matter of course, close shut between my lips, and I had no fear for her. But now, without a moment's hesitation, I told the chief the whole story." I have tried to help you by keeping back some of these things," I said, " until the time came to arrange our evidence ; but now what I have told you may use as a check at need. Pony Jack meant it to be told, if he meant anything."" There's the rub," the chief growled. " Did he mean anything? In my opinion he was off his head.""In my opinion," I retorted, "he was not. But wait, we still have these bullets. When you refused to take care of them, I turned them over to the judge. Now we have found Mac's pistol and Mike's," and I told him briefly how they were found." How will you know which belonged to which?" he objected." I'll tell you. Mike was killed by a bullet, and there is one pistol with one cartridge empty which that ball will fit."" Good ! ""The other ball," I went on, "will fit another revolver, and there's just one empty chamber."" One empty chamber in each, eh ?"" No, and there's the curious feature. Mike's weapon, or the one I believed to be his, was loaded in a peculiar fashion. Every chamber had been

loaded, but every other one was loaded with a blank cartridge, and two chambers had been fired. If every other one was blank, then he who fired it shot one bullet and one blank."Therefore--"Therefore, if Mike shot Jack--and I believe he did--then Mac' shot his brother, meaning it possibly for Jack."" Possibly," echoed the chief. " Unless Jack shot Mike."" Jack's bullets would not fit the wound. Besides, I happen to know, as well as you do, that neither of the two pistols you took from Jack's belt had been discharged. Jack's work that night was done with a knife."" There still remains Miss Starr's weapon."I put my hand in my pocket and drew it out.There it is," I said, "just as we found it upon Roxy's winter coal pile. Examine it."" It is loaded ! " he cried ; " both barrels ! "He turned it about in his hand, and suddenly his eyes lighted." Precisely ; and the bullet would not seriously harm a healthy rabbit, eh? "" Masters," cried Barry, "you have helped me immensely! You have been wiser than I ! May I keep this weapon?"" Surely," I said, well pleased."And," he went on, "if necessary, I shall make another speech and denounce Pony Jack."There was much noise and turbulence upon the street the next night, and Barry's men were very much in evidence.I was leaving my room at a late hour when I sawLieutenant Morton coming toward me, and stood at my door awaiting him. He bore himself with his usual dignity; but his first words showed him an anxious man." You must forgive me, Mr. Masters," he began, "for coming to you when your hands and mind, I know, must be very fully occupied. The fact is, you are the only man here whom I can fully trust. May I go on?"" By all means," I answered. " I am quite at your disposal, and glad to be so."" Thank you. You, of course, have heard the latest talk of the street ? "I nodded." It is not that which is my chief anxiety, although it is the cause of the greater. It is poor Hubert that is my trouble now. The boy has taken it into his head that he is responsible for the present state of things. I have kept him pretty well in hand for some time--since that unlucky race, in fact ; but to-day, while I was at company drill, someone, I can't learn who, first filled his ears with the story about this letter I am supposed to have written, and then got him to drink some wine or beer. To make matters worse, his captain, unbeknown to me, sent him to town with a squad to arrest a delinquent, and gave them two hours' leave." While he was in town they began to taunt him and to threaten me, and then Hubert, filled with remorse at the trouble which he imagined was of his making, turned upon them with a boy's bluff that any but fools would have recognised as such, and declared that they had hit upon the wrong man ; that he shot Mike Aiken, and that I did all in my power to stay his hand."" What folly ! "" Folly, indeed, and worse than folly ! It may be suicide! "" But a noble folly, we must admit," I said ; " and, of course, you can readily disprove his statement."" That is where the trouble lies. Any statement that I can make will only tighten the net around the unfortunate boy."I sat silent. What could I say to this?" Barry will have told you that I had refused to give an alibi in order to refute that letter ? "" That letter," I declared, " can easily be proved a forgery."" I know, but listen. I will tell you the worst. The night of the shooting Hubert was in one of his despondent and obstinate moods, and when I found that he had obtained town leave, I came also, not with him, but keeping as close to him as I thought prudent. Several times I followed him out past Roxy's place, and as it grew near morning I felt assured that he meant to wait until four o'clock and possibly try to speak with her. When it neared that hour he once more turned his steps in that direction, and at last I approached him. I need not dwell upon what passed between us. My presence acted like powder upon flame, and he became furiously angry, and more to annoy me than in deadly earnest, I believe, declared his intention to know if Pony Jack had been put in his place as her escort. If he had, the boy declared, he would shoot him at the very gate. This was the last straw. I was weary, and I suppose nervous, and my own temper arose. I declared that if such was his intention I would stay by him to see fair play, and when he had killed his

man, to take him to the station, and hand him over to Chief Barry." We walked around and around that cursed block half-a-dozen times at least, and then hearing voices, I pulled him up by main force upon the side street just below the hotel. He did not make much effort to shake off my hold. He knew the grip," grimly. "And as we stood there we heard them pass the street crossing near us--the judge, Roxy, Sydney Starr, and--yes, Pony Jack, and then the foolish fellow, taking me off my guard, set off, turning back the way we had come, and so around the block once more. I guessed his plan at once ; he meant to see if Jack was allowed to linger at the gate. But all was quiet when we again passed Roxy's, and Hubert seemed all at once to break up. His pace began to lag, and when we were again upon the sheltered spot where we had stood before, the boy sat down upon the narrow steps of the laundry, and dropped his head in his hand." I don't know how long we sat there, but suddenly we heard a voice, pistol shots, and then someone moving close to us. As the boy started up, I restrained him, and at that moment officer Smith stumbled out of the next doorway, and set off in the direction of the sounds. We waited a short time, and hearing no call for help and no further shooting, hurried away."He paused and sighed again. " You see," he added, " how impossible all this talk of an alibi surely is?"" I see," I said slowly, and I am heartily in sympathy with you in your troubles. I want to help you. One thing I am determined upon, matters must be forced to a crisis. Meantime, your brother. How

did he come out to-night ?" The look in his face stopped me. It was almost a look of pride, as he answered"The boy having made his declaration, called to one of his comrades, and turned to go, when a dozen fellows rushed forward, and declared their intention to put him under arrest. Instantly he turned upon them, his eyes blazing, ' Do you think I want to run away?' he said scornfully. ` I am going to the chief of police now to give myself up, and,' here he pulled a pistol and swept a glance from man to man, `let the man who thinks he wants to be my escort come on,' he said. ` I can shoot straight yet.' He went out, and the half dozen or more of our men who chanced to be in the place lined up behind him. We're escort enough, Hube,' one of them said, and they marched away together without a follower. He went straight to Chief Barry, and handing him his gun, told him why he was there. Barry, God bless him, understood the case, and getting up his horse took Hube straight out to the fort, had an interview with the captain, and left Hubert in his hands. He is now under arrest, and upon parole within the grounds."" It was a very wise move," I said thoughtfully. " Of course, your brother, out there, is safe, and all the formalities have been observed."CHAPTER XXVIII
PLEASANT SURPRISESTHE day after my talk with Philip Morton, the Deacon came to me with the picture of the woman at the cottage. It was a good picture, and with it in hand I went to Roxy's, and asked to see Miss Starr in the parlour." Miss Starr," I began, as soon as she entered, " it is right that I should tell you now who I am, and why I have taken so prominent a part in these recent events," and then, briefly, I told her that I was a New York detective, and what the business was that first brought me to this western town. " I tell you this now," I added, " because it is quite time that we take the aggressive. I am here as your friend in this matter of Aiken's death, and in all else, and I trust that you will not hinder what we are trying to do by withholding anything you may be able to tell me.""What do you wish to hear from me? " she asked ; and I placed the picture in her hand without a word.When she had looked at it for some moments I asked : " Do you know that face? "She dropped the card upon the table between us with a little gesture of repulsion." Yes," she replied, " I have good reason to know her.""You once hinted to the judge that you knew

who risked your life by cutting the bridle at the races. Is that true?"" I only meant to imply then that I knew, or believed, that it was done by a woman. I could not see her face because it was so closely veiled. It was this that caused me to notice her particularly; she came near to my horse, keeping its head always between us, and stood there for a short time, seemingly stroking his nose, and I saw her hands lifted as if feeling for his bit or bridle. After she had gone, I recalled that I had distinctly felt the rein twitch in my hand."" After you had discovered that it had been tampered with? Is that what you mean?" " Yes."" And when was this?""When we had begun our first circuit of the track. I leaned over to adjust my habit skirt, thus catching a glimpse of the bridle. A first glance showed what I took for a split. The second showed the full danger of my position."" And yet you did not stop, nor turn back?" No. I may as well say what you, of course, surmise. I am not a happy woman. I had no hope then for anything better than the present. I know now, looking back, that it was the most cowardly act of my life."Again I studied her face, and after a moment I found myself telling her how Mike and I had listened to her interview with Philip Morton in Box 10." We--or at least I--had no thought when entering the adjoining box of playing the eavesdropper, and no knowledge of your presence there ; I was intent upon my study of Mike Aiken, and I caught at any

and all opportunities to watch him. But when I heard Morton's words and his veiled threats, they startled me.""Why? " she asked again, with perfect quiet."Because I had fancied one day, upon seeing you upon the parade ground out at the fort, that your face was familiar." I was keeping a close eye upon her, and it seemed to me that now she did suppress a nervous start. " Miss Starr," I hastened to say, " I want you to trust me fully. In order to clear up this mystery, to help you and the others, I must know the whole truth. For me it will mean not simply the clearing up of the mystery of Mike Aiken's death, but the settling of two other important cases." In this combination of strangeness is mixed up the stage-robbing case, of which I have already told you a little, and another, and to me this last is the most important affair of all. This concerns one of my oldest and dearest friends, who is now wandering about in search of health and peace of mind. He has changed from a strong, happy, devoted husband to a pitiful wreck of himself, and all because a woman, beautiful but hasty, chooses to believe ill of him, where there had been no ill--no wrong. My strongest wish to-day is to restore my friend to health and happiness, by finding his lost wife, and by proving to her how mistaken she has been, Miss Starr, when I tell you that I fully believe that among the people mixed up in this matter of Mike Aiken's death are those 'who can help me, I am sure I shall have your sympathy. I must meet this strange woman who lives so secluded ; I have reason to think that she knows this missing wife ; she may even be that mistaken and long-sought-

for lady. I have in my possession at present something that almost seems to prove this. Another thing: This man MacIntyre ; I have observed you both, and--I am sure of it--he knows and fears you ; and you know and shun him!" Again for a moment I sat in silence; then rising and standing before her, I made my final appeal "Miss Starr, I need your help ; I must know what you know about these people; and if in the telling you are obliged to reveal to me things personal and heretofore guarded as a secret, believe me it shall be to me your secret still. Moreover, I will use no portion of what you may tell me without your previous knowledge--your full and free consent." I paused and waited."Mr. Masters," she said slowly, and with just a hint of tremor in her voice, " I beg you to excuse me now--to give me time to think. Oh, I shall not refuse you, but--"" How much time? " I asked, when she broke off. "Time is of value, and--"" Pardon me; shall you stop long in Mr. Jack's room ? ""Yes; for an hour possibly."" Then in half an hour you shall hear from me."Half an hour later Roxy placed a note in my hands. " I find I cannot tell my story," she wrote ; " but I will write it--all of it--and you shall have it in the morning." There was no signature.Sitting in the sick-room ten minutes later, I happened to glance toward the bed, when I was surprised to find Jack's eye fixed upon me with a keen and inquiring look. Instantly I approached him. "Jack, old man," I said quietly, "what is it?"But Pony Jack's lids fluttered feebly, and settled above the keen blue eyes ; and though I stood beside him for long moments, they did not lift again."Too bad," I murmured aloud, as I smoothed his pillow. " I thought he was going to know me."And as I drew my chair close beside his bed, I added, still in that sick-room murmur: " He's coming on slowly, poor chap," and I laid a quiet finger upon his wrist, and let it hover a moment over the pulse. Looking up after an hour of solitary watching, I saw Roxy standing in the doorway, her face a solemn interrogation, and her eyes upon Pony Jack."Is he resting?" she faintly whispered. But I motioned her to come forward, and said in a tone loud enough to be heard across the room" Come in, Roxy. Yes, the patient is resting well. He seems to be not quite conscious of what is going on about him. Don't get on very fast, eh ? "" Why, sir, I--I don't know for sure. D-do you think it will disturb him if I talk to you a bit whilst you're sittin' here ? "" No, Roxy, I don't. To speak in a low tone in a sick-room is not half so unpleasant as a buzzing whisper to a wakeful patient, and Jack here seems to doze through all the sounds of the street."" Yes, I've noticed that--and yet sometimes he opens his eyes an' seems that bright-lookin' ! Seems sort a queer like, don't ye think, sir ? "" Oh, no ! " I reassured her. " It's often the case, when one is dazed, that one lies between sleeping and waking. Then the eyes are opened often, but with no meaning in them just a sort of stare."And then as Roxy sank slowly into a rocking-chair beside the window, I asked:" By the way, has Jack talked much at any time since--since you told me--" I paused, as if hesitating. " About that pistol in the cellar, sir ?" I nodded." Well, now, that's just what the doctor asked me."Here I fancied there was a slight stirring beneath the bed-clothes, but the still face was mask-like." Why ! I thought you said--"" Oh, I didn't tell him, only that Jack had seemed to know me fer a minit, an' then sort of rambled off. Oh! an' by the way, here I comes in just full of the latest, an' it's all druv out o' my head ! Do ye think it's annything more than a big bluff like, this talk that's goin' about all the night that a big mob's a-gatherin' sly-like, to come down and surprise 'em at the jail, an' lynch Hubert Morton ? ""Well, they sleep with one eye open out there, Roxy, and I don't think the mob will get beyond wind work. There must be a change of front soon. If Jack does not soon come to himself, we must look up another witness, who is not far away, but is living secluded in a suburban cottage." As I uttered these words my fingers were lightly laid once more upon Pony Jack's wrist. His pulse had gone up perceptibly. Pony Jack was playing 'possum all right, but he could not control his pulse, of course.That evening I had a brief chat with Roxy Higgins, and when we separated her face wore a beaming smile, and we quite understood each other.The next night the Deacon lounged past me as I sat near the hotel office window smoking my aftersupper cigar. " Step up to your room and wait for

me," he whispered, and twenty minutes later we were face to face.His news was that Mac' was on to me, telling the veiled woman that I was a detective from New York, and was after her. It was a matter of lost or stolen jewels, as far as the Deacon had been able to make out, and a matter of murder or suicide in a river. Mac' was evidently very anxious to carry out his plans at once, and one of these plans consisted in blackmailing some rich lady, or getting her to the cottage, where money could be squeezed out of her by threats. And Mac' was desirous to see Pony Jack ; and the veiled woman, called " Val " by Mac', was anxious that he should.This was important news indeed ; and after a little deliberation I asked the Deacon to watch Mac' closely, which he promised, adding, with one of his sly grins : " He told Val he needed my help."As I entered Roxy's house that night, she handed me a letter from Miss Starr, which I slipped in my pocket as I ascended to Pony Jack's room, where I found the patient resting quietly after an hour of sitting up.CHAPTER XXIX
A GATHERING STORMIT was late when I locked my door, and, with Sydney Starr's letter in my hand, turned up the wick of my greasy lamp, and carefully drew down the window-shade.As the envelope slipped from the thick, compact packet, I found myself staring down at a second envelope, creamy and fine, like the first, and just a size smaller. But while the outer wrapper had been simply gummed together, this one was sealed with violet wax and stamped with a seal--a monogram ; while upon its face these words were written, entirely covering its two surfaces"I am trusting in your honour to-day as I never thought to trust again in any man. I have written my story, and it is sealed within this packet. Will you bear with me, and leave the packet as it is, the seal unbroken, for a time, for as long as you can? When the crisis comes, and you find anyone menaced by a real danger, then, and not till then, open and read what I have written ! Do not seek me at that time, but read at once, and then--then if you can spare me further humiliation, let me step away, somehow, unseen. Only, and pray remember this, no one--no one must suffer on my account ! If that should happen I shall find courage and strength to face the worst--the end. For it would surely be the end for me,	" SYDNEY STARR."For a long time I sat with this letter in my hand, and my eyes upon the disappointing words. But I never thought to do otherwise than--after long and perplexed meditation--I did.Getting up and divesting myself of my outer garments, I carefully bestowed the second envelope and its contents in a chamois pocket which I wore strapped about my body.Having thus disposed of my strange trust, my eye fell upon the outer envelope in which it came. Picking it up, I glanced at it casually, and then slipped my finger within. Yes, I was not mistaken ; inside the envelope was a strip of thin blotting paper, such as is often found with the packets of fine linen note sheets for ladies' use.Evidently it had been put in in haste and as an afterthought, for while upon the side first coming under my eye was a name, written over and over and hardly legible, a name that made me start and wonder, upon the reverse there was a pencilled note which gave me a yet more uncanny thrill" P.S.--Do you think I might be allowed to visit Jack Braddock when he is conscious again ?--S. S."To visit Jack Braddock ! I was uncertain whether to laugh or be angry as I read this tame bit of anticlimax. And then, smiling grimly, I opened my portfolio and wroteMY DEAR MISS STARR,--Your packet is in my hands, and your wish will be my law. Of course,there is no reason why you should not see Braddock as soon as he is able to receive a visitor.--Yours to command," CARL MASTERS."At an early hour next morning I left this note at Roxy's door for Miss Starr ; but I did not enter. I had encountered the Deacon at the door of the dining-room, and he had asked me to come to his room at once, if possible.He began at once to tell me that he had planned to have me overhear what Mac' had to say to him. Mac' had asked him for an interview at noon, and he had, therefore, prepared a hidden opening through the partition between their two rooms for my service. This hole was covered only by the wall paper in Mac's room, while in the Deacon's room it was hidden behind the cheap six-by-eight looking-glass hanging from a rusty nail by a piece of pack-thread.When I was on my way from the Deacon's room to my own, a bell boy met me, to tell me that the judge was at the door, and wanted me to take a ride with him.I went down at once. The judge told me that he and Chief Barry were convinced that Mike Aiken's death had interfered with a whole lot of devilry planned by the dead man for the very night when he was killed. To cover up the abduction of Miss Starr, his henchmen were instructed to create no end of disturbance, laid out in detail, at a signal given by Mike. That signal was never given, but the plans were still in existence, and might be carried out any moment.The mob was growing bolder every day. The day before a crowd had invaded the camp at the fort, and had boisterously declared Morton ought to be imprisoned in the jail, not at the fort. They had been driven out by the soldiers almost at the point of the bayonet.It was clear why they wanted Hubert Morton in the flimsy jail. If they could get the sheriff to demand the prisoner--! The sheriff must disappear for a short time, we decided, and the judge turned his horse's head back toward town, where I was to meet the chief of police.The chief looked very grave." Hundreds of dangerous men," he said, "have come to town from the bush. They would not be here except that they knew there will be fighting, bloodshed, and booty galore. Hubert Morton is in danger; they will try to get him and lynch him. As he cannot prove an alibi, his foolish self-accusation still stands uncontradicted."" Sure enough," replied the judge, " but I cannot believe that the avenging of Mike's death is the principal motive of all these people."" It isn't," consented the chief. " My reports say that there are other things on the programme for which Morton's case is but an excuse or pretext. There are two sets of ringleaders, working together partly, and having different objects in view partly. Dillon, my trusted lieutenant, told me just now that a committee is to wait on me and insist that Morton shall be brought to jail early to-night. Two men on the committee are Mike's heelers."Chief Barry invited the judge to assist him in the social function of receiving the committee, and I hurried to my trysting-place.On my way past the Prairie City Stables, I noticed a large and roving crowd. On inquiry, I was informed that a rider had just come in with the news that the stage, due about three hours later, had been wrecked, and could not come in that day.I knew that a large amount of bullion was to arrive in town that day by train, to be transferred to the stage, and I suspected a connection between this fact and the wreck.While we were standing there four men, the committee, came along at a business-like pace, but when they heard the news their steps became less brisk, and when they reached a spot where the crowd was thinning, they held a short confabulation and separated. Evidently the news had disconcerted their plans, and the call upon Barry was postponed.CHAPTER XXX
MAC'S PLANSAs I entered the dining-room of the Lindholm I saw Mac' and the Deacon at a table, and seated myself so that I faced the former.I knew he had been at the cottage that morning, and I soon saw that he had only now returned from there, and that the news of the disabled coach was news indeed to him. Indeed, I felt sure, from his gestures, that the Deacon was telling the story in detail.At the end of the meal I went straight to the Deacon's room. I did not know how he proposed to keep Mac' from a possible intrusion, but I felt sure that I could trust both his ingenuity and his caution, and to find the office boy loitering near the door was an unpleasant surprise.But as I approached, the lad beckoned and held his place near the door." Here's the key, sir," he whispered, as he put the key, with a slip of paper twisted about the handle, into my hand. "The Deacon said I's to tell you it's all 0. K.," and he skipped away whistling.Billy was a boy wise beyond his years, and I felt tolerably safe in his hands, knowing, as I did, the esteem in which the Deacon was held by all the inmates of the house.But as I stepped within the room I started and

almost turned to flee, for upon a chair, exactly opposite the door, lay a gaily-bedecked woman's hat and a light cloth jacket. A second glance, however, showed me that, save for myself, the room had no occupant. So I closed the door and turned my attention to the slip of paper in my hand." Do not disturb my millinery," it ran, " and be sure to keep out of range when I open the door and come in, as I intend to do, for a moment."Laughing at this characteristic trick, I established myself to await his coming.I had not long to wait, and I drew myself up against the wall, close behind the door, when, from farther down the long, narrow passage, I heard footsteps and the voice of Billy just outside.The--there's a lady in yer room, sir," I heard the young rascal say. " She said 'twas all right, and she was 'spected."And then I heard an exclamation from the Deacon, a murmur of words, as the door swung inward." It was the sure way to keep him out," whispered the grinning plotter, " and I have my own personal reason for wishing him to think my affections are a bit entangled just now, see? It helps account for various otherwise mysterious absences that he's got on to of late."He skipped to the wall and uncovered his speaking tube, and after a few more whispered words went out, and I turned the key in the door with an ostentatious rattle.The two men devoted a few moments to rough jesting over what Mac' believed to be a clever point, made at the expense of his chum, and it was quite clear that the new departure gratified the elder man, and set his mind at ease about his companion's dis-

appearances. But it was also evident that MacIntyre was uneasy and in haste to get to business, and soon the tone of his conversation changed." That's it, old man." Mac's tone was conciliatory. " I do want more of your company, a lot more of it.""Huh!"" Look ye here, Mac," the Deacon's voice began, before I talk business with you or lift my fist in any more of your d---- work, I want an explanation. You doped my B. and S. the other night, and now the court'll hear why."" Aw, come, Deak ! You're joshin' ! Sure you don't--"" Yes, I do ! Quit it, Mac', or else open that door an' I'll step out! I guess you know what that'll mean, huh ? "The words sounded ugly enough. The Deacon was a good actor." It comes round to this, MacIntyre," went on the menacing voice. " I never did go back on a pal, an' there's no pal ever went back on me to the tune of a cold dope before. I came out here to work with you and to take your orders--to a certain extent. I've asked no questions, and you can't say I ain't stood ready to jump when you whistled. But I did not bind myself not to use my eyes and ears and do a bit of footing up when I'd got all my figures. By ----, you brought me out here for biz', I thought. And then, as if things weren't sleepy enough, you must help me to a nap just when the time arrives for a show down ! D'ye want to 'xplain, or do you want me to mention a few points that I've taken in in my sleep, as it were ? "And then the voice of Mac' took up the dialogue. He had not expected to be mixed up in any out-

side affairs when they came here together with their little game to play, but, first off, he found himself face to face with a man he had known of old." Needn't 'xplain," broke in the Deacon. " That was brother Mike Aiken !"" Good heavens! How did you get that idea ? "" Oh, chuck that! Man alive, I've a pair of eyes ! "It's the women that gives us the worst jolts," resumed Mac'. " And when 1 got a wire from a friend, that was just two hours or so ahead of herself, I'll admit, I was done. I didn't want you to get on to the thing, and I was fool enough to think I could hide her up for a day or two, and then she'd move on. She was going to 'Frisco."" Oh, she was ! "" Of course, she didn't go, and, of course, she's raised the deuce with me ; and when I found she was bound to come up town that night, I was about crazy. I didn't want you to see her and keep up your----joshin', and so I--well, I gave you the doze, Tom. I hated it, but--"" Well, I'm glad to hear that. It was a bad tasting drink, Mac'. I--"" What, you didn't--""Yes, I did. Don't interrupt me. I struck the unusual flavour at the first gulp, and then with the glass still at my lips, I caught that eye of yours watchin' me, and I tumbled, sharp.""Good Lord ! ""My manly fist is man's size, old chap, and yer didn't observe as my palm curled coyly around that green flint glass tumbler that the dope didn't go out until I set it down, my fist still embracing it, upon the window ledge. I fear it may have rusted the screen some. You're not a crack chemist, MacIntyre."" And then you didn't--"" I didn't go to sleep? Oh yes, I did. I had got just enough, and I dozed off, as you had planned, with my head upon your pillow, just where you left me"" And you stayed ? "" Oh, no, I did not stay--that is, not longer than was needful. You see I was asleep when you left the room, and locked me in. Then when I awoke I felt somewhat ill. So I lay there possibly another hour." I was not too sick to swear nor to think," went on Mac's tormentor, " and when I found the door locked I took out my combination pocket knife. Say, that knife's a dandy, man. These old hotel doors are put together with basting thread all through, and I ripped off the lock. By the way, I lost one of those screws out of the plate ; did you ever miss it ? I suppose not. Well, I guess it must have been pretty near midnight when I got myself braced up and around to the theatre."" The theatre ! "" Yep. Things seemed sort of tame there. I saw you kind o' standin' guard down in the office, and I sort of drew off and kept an eye on things from a little way off. I took a lope down the sand-bank to Miss Green's house and saw the parlour lit up, and then I came back. But I did not see you at the old stand. But I don't give up easily, and so I turned my attention to your brother while I waited."" Waited, but where ? "" Oh, not far from the theatre, and presently I saw you again."" And then ? "" I decided that my best play was to keep close in your shadow till morning, and that is what I did."And now the silence was of such duration that I began to feel uneasy, without knowing why. And then there was another sound of moving, and I knew MacIntyre was upon his feet." Well ? " and then after a moment. " You have not finished?"" No," retorted the other, "that is for you to do. I've shown you my hand. Now let's talk business. Is this partnership dissolved ? Or what ? "" Do you want to quit?"" Have I ever given you a right to think I was weakenin' ? "" D----, no! Unless you want to square with me for--that dope. It was only a mild opiate."" Oh, I'm 'squared,' as for that! Now suppose you tell me just what you wanted to say, when you got me up here, in as few words as possible. And, let me assure you that I know all that's been goin' on--I think--since you and me first struck this town."" And--you don't want to quit ? "" Why should I ? If there's any fun ahead I'd be a chump to quit right now! Only, mind this, it must be an open game, a square deal, from first to last. I'm with you on these terms, and on no other ! If you mean business it might be well for you to begin by explaining the present situation."" What do you mean?"" Well, the nature of the business that the gentleman from the hills has brought you. And the truth, so far as you know it, about the broken-down stage."And then, for an hour, I lay upon the Deacon's tumbled bed, my head just below the "tube," and resting upon hand and elbow, and listened to the voice of the man MacIntyre, while he told his story--a story quite as interesting to me as it could have

been to the Deacon. And known to me in part, as it was to him.There had been a string of hindrances that were unaccountable to him, and to the men at the other end of the line. They were often little things in themselves ; but they had been sufficient to hinder and baulk many of the lesser projects, upon which the gang had counted. But the chief enterprise was now ready for the final stroke.A mining company, the largest of any yet organised, had been slowly arranging its plans, and advancing step by step, until the purchase money, the last and strongest of the features so carefully arranged for, was to arrive on the morning of the next day.It was because of this that the down stage had been so manipulated, before setting out, that the strain of a particularly bad piece of the road, about midnight, would prove too rough for a safe passage, and the work had been so cleverly managed that the break had occurred at the identical spot selected, and almost with the first jar or bump. To go on was, of course, impossible, and the only thing remaining for the wretched passengers and luggage, was to await the up stage, and be taken back to their starting-point.This, of course, would disarrange the time card, planned so that the stage might pass the unsafe bits of mountain desert in broad daylight, and fetch up in Cheyenne a bit before dark." A lot of fuss and feathers, I call it," sniffed the Deacon, whose rle it was to seem out of humour. "And I thought you an' me was goin' to be aboard of some o' them down stages by this time. What about that dust that was comin' from the blue dog mine? "" Well, you ought to have known that Mike's death


would upset our plans! We had ought to a been up there by now, but then--oh, hang the women! "" What's the women to do with this business of the up-goin' stage to-morrow ? Come now! "And Mac' talked so fluently, that the Deacon found his interest growing, or so his companion thought, as he unfolded the complicated scheme of outlawry." You see," Mac' concluded, "how dead easy it's going to be ! "" Um--m! " demurred the Deacon. " It looks sort of easy, but--well, I wish the thing could be pulled off without Tom, Dick, and Harry in it."" Pshaw ! Why, look at it! Here comes the U. P. train with a cool half million in cash aboard. There'll be some tall cussin' when they find they can't start 'er right up to the hills before the news gets too far. But things can't be helped ; and so off it goes, to spend the day in the bank. See?"" Yep," gloomily.Then they stew and watch, but the stage won't be fixed till so late that she can just manage to pull in here a leetle after dark."" Jes so! Hum!"" Oh, hang your 'Hum has.' Look at it! Here's the situation, slick as grease. And if we fellows don't kill two birds with one stone, as you may say, then I'm up the stream, that's all."" That's so, at any rate," assented the Deacon cheerfully." Bah I Look at it, I say! Here's the bank at the north-west end of the town ; standing somewhat isolated--as it were. And then, down at the south end stands the old jail; 'nother case of too much hurry. A new jail 'ud be a harder nut to crack."" So-oh ! Well, maybe it would."" Oh, keep it up! Now here, somewhere between 'em--the bank an' the jail, is the Hotel."" Lindholm House. Yes, sir, there it is."" Now, here's the situation. To-morrow night Mike's will be in full blast again. Old woman's orders. And there'll be a rush there."" Most sure, that is ! "" Course 'tis ! Now, soon after the theatre starts up, down comes the old stage a tearin' an' with the blue dog dust in the boot." Well, presently there comes a cry. There's a mob from Mike's attackin' the jail. They're bound to lynch young Morton."" That's right ! "" Glad you're comin' to your senses! Well, there's a rush, of course; every one goes to the jail,--that is, all but a few choice spirits--"" You and me for example?"" And," Mac' finishes, without replying to this suggestive query, "it will be strange if, while the band plays at the theatre, and the people outside all howl and run to defend the jail, the bank, lightly guarded, can't be relieved of its treasure in short order."" So it appears ! And now--where do I come in ? Do I pull the rope, or carry the sack ? Mind this No back seat for your uncle ! "" There's one thing that's giving me some uneasiness, Deak, and I'm free to admit it. I want you to help me out."For a moment there was silence; and then I could detect the covert sneer in the voice in which the Deacon made answer" Oh, so at last we have got back to the women ! Which one do you want me to deal with? Oh, I've

had my eyes open, Mac', and you were trying some manner of game with Miss Starr, eh, and you've got to consider the lady at the Green Cottage ! Come, man, out with it! Lord, a man shouldn't be trying to manage two women ! One's an awful handful--most times."" By the powers, Deacon," the other broke out, "you're right ! I can't tell you all the details, but I'll tell you this now; I want to keep those two women apart ! "" Why, that sounds dead easy."" Sounds--yes. But that ain't all, nor the worst. I want to keep one of them from meeting a certain man." " Who's the woman ? "Mac's voice dropped. " The one at the cottage." "Um! And--who is the man ?" " The man is Pony Jack."" Does she know him ? "" Rather. She was in love with him, back in the States some three years ago. She followed me here because she had got a hint that he was somewhere west. She has found out he's here."" And you don't want them to meet?"" Not yet."" Does he know she's here ?"" I don't think so."" Would he care, if he did ? "" Not a rap ! Or so I believe." " And you ? "" Oh, hang it! I wouldn't care where she went, if I didn't need her help to pull off a little affair, or a big one, if it turns out right. And if she sees Pony Jack it's all up I "" And your `little affair'? It concerns Miss Starr, eh? Do you want to keep her from seeing--anybody?"" I want to keep the two women apart--until we can get them both out of this place, or away from Pony Jack ! "" And then ? "" And then I don't care how quick they come together."Again there was a moment of utter silence, and I knew that the Deacon was getting upon his feet. "Mac'," he said slowly, "you had better make things a bit plainer, if you want my help. Why must these two be kept apart now ? "" Listen," broke in Mac' nervously. "It's like this! She, Val, thinks she wants to see Miss Starr ; she thinks she can tell her something, and get a favour in return. I have tried to make her believe that Miss Starr and Pony Jack are firm friends, see ? "" Well, I think so ! Now--another thing: what's the game with Miss Starr ? "" Well, I don't want to harm her ; but I've got a little hold upon her, and--if you must know--my friend Val thinks she has also. Say, old man, we can't go into any more details now ! There's your friend next door; I'd clean forgot her l Say, you are a cool one ! If you'll come to my room after supper I'll tell you the rest. Say you'll help me out, Deak ? You're goin' to see me through? "" See you through ! Well I should think! Never you fear, old boy ! I came out here with you for just that purpose. Oh, I'm with you ! Only I'll have to get things straightened out a bit."" Oh, I'll explain all right. By Jove, I feel better already ; come, let's scatter."But the Deacon, with a thought for his meeting with me a few moments later, now developed a growing interest in the two young women in question,

and pressed home a few leading questions such as:--" What do you intend to do with Miss Starr? Of course you mean to abduct her, I know that. But--"" Hang it," Mac' broke in. " Is there anything you don't know? Oh, well, of course, you ought to know it. Yes, she is to be abducted, and then I am to rescue her. I want to get her confidence--if possible."" Oh, I see! You intend all this to come off to-morrow night?"" Yes. I and--the others."" Well, count me in ! And the other, your friend of the cottage ? "" It's a case of two evils. If she's reasonable I shall have her help me, and make it worth her while. But I can't make this work unless I can count on Pony Jack. If he won't listen to reason-- I must get rid of Val by telling her where to find her dear Jack, and letting her fly to him or to--anywhere. In this case I must depend upon you to help me with the fair Miss Starr."" Oh! Well, I'll do my prettiest. I observe you have fought shy of the lady thus far. How will you begin? By asking for an interview, and warning her against Val ? Look here, Mac', you know I don't like to set out and then fail ; I must know this. If Miss Starr proves obstinate and must be coerced, how much grip have you? Exactly how much do you know about her ?"" I know all about her ! And she can't hold out if we put on pressure. It's a sure thing ! "CHAPTER XXXI
LETTERS FROM EAST AND WESTDURING the night and the early hours of the next morning there was less noise on the streets and more drinking at Mike's.The chief had sworn in a baker's dozen of men as deputies, haranguing them from the steps of the hotel. The men were not of the reliable kind, but they were put under orders of Con Grimshaw, the old giant miner, who would be sure to keep them from joining the mob.But a little later the good and true had come to the parlour of the Lindholm, by twos and threes, and there, behind closed doors, the parts had been distributed for the coming dramatic scenes by Chief Barry, and the last instructions given.The next afternoon Hubert Morton was quietly smuggled into the jail.That night, just before supper, I received two letters, one from Lettice Carolyn as follows: MY KINDEST OF FRIENDS--Your letter is not altogether a surprise to me, nor, as you seem to fancy, is it displeasing. I have not, as you may think, read it to Allan. The fact that you have been for years his bosom friend and comrade, made it impossible that I should look upon you as a person quite unknown." I had seen your picture, and listened to Allan's

eulogies and anecdotes, all with you as the central figure, by the hour, and so I feel that I know you well and have been your friend from the first. But I have so little time and thought now for anything save Allan and his hopes, that as you seem to lay especial stress upon the necessity for a ` serious consideration of the situation,' I think it will be wise to leave all as it now stands for the present, and while not `displeased ' I will ask you to defer your 'argument' and my reply to it until--another day. You once said to me, 'To work at his best a man should face but one problem at a time.' Our `problem,' the ` Eversoll Problem,' is not yet worked out. Courage, mon ami." Did you really mean it when you wrote that Allan would get some new and invigorating views of life if lie could stand a bit of plain living, and come on to Cheyenne for a week or two? At all events your nonsense about the `natural man' and your account of those unfortunate Mortons have set him into a fine fever, and he declares his intention to set out to-morrow by the U.P., and drop in upon you. Next Thursday ! I think he will have slept off this crazy notion by morning, but if not--well, I shall ' never desert Micawber,' and if Allan comes, I come. If there is a strong reason why he should not come, a telegram might catch us at Salt Lake City. Honestly, I cannot guess just why you have tried to arouse Al's interest in your `Woolly Town,' but Allan has got the notion that your Philip Morton may be a certain Philly Morton with whom he used to make mud pies in olden days. Have you anything hopeful to offer us ? Or is it just another heroic pull to get Allan out of the Slough of Despond, and set him on his feet again? He is a new man already ; but he is still a man of one idea, and that of his wife. Oh, my friend ! It can't be that I have got my brother back again--almost--only to see him wear out his renewed strength as he did his old, in a hopeless search for her. He will hunt 'day and night,' he says, until he

finds her, or dies trying. It seems too cruel ! I can't have it so.Till we meet--if we meet--your friend, as always," LETTICE CAROLYN."As I read this I smiled. It was so like her ! At once serious and sportive. And my reasons for asking my friend to come to this wild and now turbulent town? If I had a clue--it was only a possible clue--it was so faint, but I knew my man, and when I tempted Allan Eversoll by my story, told only in its most dramatic details, I did it hoping to arouse him by the sight of other tragedies, and by awaking his ever ready sympathies. For I knew that only so could he be drawn out of himself, and--it seemed a last resort--a forlorn hope.And he was coming! Was she also coming? The next twelve hours would tell. And then I started. What might not happen in the streets of that riotous town in the next twenty-four hours? And if Allan's coming meant Lettice also ! Well, there was Salt Lake City. There might yet be time!I took up my hat in haste, not to send the word she had suggested, but to seek Roxy Higgins.If Roxy opened her arms and her doors to Lettice Carolyn, she was safe, though all Wyoming was embroiled.At the door of my room I paused, and took up the second and almost forgotten letter and broke the seal. It was from the chief of police of New York, and contained this information" Some one has sent a full account of the long wanted French woman to a private agency of New York City, and this agency has sent one of their men to bring her from Cheyenne to New York, en route to Paris."And there was a postscript, hastily scribbled: " Some bewildering news, contradicting the above, has just come in. `When affirmed, will send details, by next mail."I fell in my chair and read again and again without understanding.On my way to Roxy's house I was amazed to see the veiled woman coming toward me. She stopped me, lifted her veil, and I recognised--Nell Green, who asked me to deliver to Mr. Hall the message that the woman at her cottage was getting ready to leave. As she turned to go, a little accident happened to her. A little white handkerchief which she had taken from the side pocket of the veiled woman's jacket, fell to the ground.I picked it up, and looked at it closely. Great Scott, there was an initial and a name in one corner that staggered me. I hid my find in my breast pocket and ran to the telegraph office to send the following message to Allan : " Stop here without fail. Masters."Then I hurried to Roxy's house. She volunteered the news that Jack was improving rapidly, and that Miss Starr had been powerfully uneasy, and that the judge had been in to comfort her.I hastened home to ask Lieutenant Morton for an interview by letter. I was almost sure the veiled woman was the girl from Paris, and I must get the soldier's help to protect Miss Starr from this detective coming from New York, must get him if possible to testify that Miss Starr was not the French fugitive.After writing this letter I strolled out on the street. Pulling unevenly at my cigar as I loitered past the office of Chief Barry, I looked up and was somewhat

surprised to see the windows brightly glowing, and the shades only half drawn.Wondering a little, I crossed the street, and halted opposite the front window." Barry is not fretting much, eh, my friend ? " said someone at my elbow, and I turned to meet the quizzical smile of the judge, his cigar between his fingers.Framed in the window opposite us we could see four men seated about a small table, their hats worn at various angles, and the one who sat with his back to the street was Chief Barry." Nothing like philosophy, you see, Masters," resumed my friend. " Barry knows how to assure the dozen or more who are spying to-night about his house, his office, and the jail, that he is not looking for serious trouble. Don't look exactly ready for a night alarm, eh ? "I had been thinking, while I listened to his halfjesting speech, and I now turned away and slipped my hand beneath his elbow." It certainly looks well," I replied ; " and I dare say that hat of Barry's is known to every man and boy in Cheyenne. Who is the wearer to-night? And is Barry at the jail or taking a last peep at the fastening of the bank vault ? "" Neither. He's at home and in bed, where you and I should be. And yet," he added, " I'll admit to you, Masters, that I feel a little too anxious for comfortable and dreamless rest ! I think of the blood that must flow. And--I'm horribly sorry for, and anxious about, Sydney Starr ! Masters, that dainty, beautiful woman is suffering frightfully. There is a load, heavier than any we can guess at, weighing her down, and sapping her strong faith

and courage. God! but my heart aches for that poor child! "And I answered fervently, " Yes, I pity her with all my heart ! "We were strolling back towards the Lindholm, and the " Roxy Higgins' house," as it was familiarly called, and silence had fallen upon both, as we passed slowly side by side.Opposite Roxy's door, the judge hailed, "Come in for a bit. A finger of old B. & S. won't hurt either one to-night ! "But I had no desire for old B. & S. and had it on my lips to say so when the door of the house opened quietly and softly, and a man came out. It was Phil Morton ; and before he was half-way down the half dozen steps we had recognised his fatigue uniform, and met him with hands extended." Morton, how goes it ? Stop a moment!"He grasped our hands warmly, and seemed more than commonly cordial and unreserved." I've been calling upon Jack Braddock," he said. " I've seen the doctor and he advised it. I've told him," and he glanced toward the judge, " that he had nothing to fear from me. He met me like a man." He paused as if hesitating." Morton," I said, slipping my hand beneath his arm, " I am going to leave you two to talk over what I am sure you are both interested in, but first tell me about your brother. How is lie meeting his crucial test, and does he know that we are all at his back, ready to see him through, and staking our faith on him and his ultimate triumph ? "" Gentlemen," Morton's voice shook, " I'm proud to tell you that Hubert is bearing his ordeal manfully. The last vestige of the careless young fellow, immature

and impatient of restraint or criticism, is, I believe, gone for ever. He has borne himself gallantly in the face of several trials of his strength and courage. But, let me tell you the story of this morning ! I daresay you know how kind the boys have been to Hubert and to myself, for his sake, and you have heard how they came together by squads and agreed, horse and foot, to defend the boy, 'if they had to take the town,' and when the officers learned the temper of the men they called me in and told me that if Hubert said the word, or if I requested it for him, no sheriff should take him to the town jail, be their authority what it might." Of course, I was in an embarrassing position. But to make my yarn short--especially here--"" Where you're concerned in it ? Of course," popped in the judge once more. " All right ! go on, old man! "" To make an end, then, I went to Hubert, and he told me to thank them all-there were tears in the fellow's eyes-and that he was proud and glad of their friendship, but that when the proper officer came with the proper authority to arrest him, he should submit and go to jail. And from this they could not move him. `I'll be the cause of no more trouble to my brother and my friends!' he declared.' It's my duty to go, and go I must.'" When Hubert reached his quarters in the jail he was feeling quite like himself, I had felt anxious, and when I knew he was coming down I set out and reached the jail almost an hour ahead of him, and was in his room with him when the letter came."" What letter ? " questioned the judge sharply, and I drew a little closer." A letter which seemed to wring the poor fellow's

heart! When he had read it he laid himself down upon his cot, and without a glance in my direction covered his face, and just lay shuddering, and now and then grinding out one of those horrible sobs a man gives when the hurt is too deep for tears." I couldn't stand it, and I went to him, but-well, he could not talk. I went outside and sat in the hall upon a guard bench-there was no guard in sight." After half an hour I ventured back. He stood beside a little shelf upon the wall, where some books and a match-box stood, and he held in his fingers a burning scrap of paper. I watched it until the last charred bit dropped from his hand to the floor, and then I looked at his face. My friends-I hope I may never see such another ! It looked years older, and so hopeless! and yet, in spite of the anguish in his eyes, I saw resolve there, and he was striving, I knew, for self-control." 'Old fellow,' I said, `something has hurt you, that you've got to fight out alone, I'm afraid ! If so, I'll leave you, but only till I'm wanted, understand. Don't shut me out too long, boy.' I turned to go, and had reached the door when he called me back. lie was taking from the table the envelope he had so carefully removed from the letter, and he held it in his hand, while he explained, in short, jerky, broken sentences, as if dragged from his very heart by wrenches that hurt:" 'It's from her, Phil! It's her--her--farewell--to me. And she has commanded me to-burn it. She has told me--briefly--her secret, and trusts me to keep it.' He was silent a moment, only the envelope rustled in his quivering fingers. ' I shall keep it--always! And I've given her up, Phil! I--I--there was--is--a reason, and it's for always. It's better--

I own it, but--she has left me some--something to do. And that--may--help. I'm done with--folly ! I mean to be the man--the man she might have loved ! But--I mustn't see her--at least not for a long time; and--I want you to tell her that--that her letter is burned, first upon my heart, and then to ashes, that I'll obey her--in everything! and that I mean to conquer--and I'm not--afraid--now--of--of anything ! ' "Morton's voice dropped into silence, with a quivering sigh at the end of the last word, and then for long moments we sat speechless. Then Morton got up and shook himself, as if to shake off a burden." I must be moving," he said. "Just now I don't feel easy away from Hubert."" And--you don't--know what it means ? " queried the judge, as if Morton had not spoken since the story came to an end." No more than-I was about to say you, but you are her friend ? " questioningly." Only to the barrier which shuts us out all alike. She is to me a riddle, well hidden. But, by Jove, I'm like Hubert, I can't doubt her ! "I got up quickly. " I'm looking for the Deacon soon," I said, for these men were now in my confidence, where MacIntyre and the stage robbers were concerned. Somehow these last words grated upon me.Morton had already passed us and now stood at the bottom of the steps. "Good-night," he said, as he extended a hand to each and departed.Then, as I looked, the door just beyond him swung inward with a little creak, and a low voice said" Jew-ee whiz ! But that boy Hube Morton's a whole brick an' sun dried ! " I knew the voice, and I

knew the figure that the next instant came out into the starlight.It was Pony Jack, and he caught the judge by the hand quite in his old hilarious manner."Judge, shake! Ain't I a dandy at recuperation, once I get at it, eh ? I just had to get up and follow Phil Morton out, to get my nose into the world for a minute ! But I can't stay ! I've got to be an interestin' sick man one day longer--hullo!"" Praise be the saints, an have I found yez' at last ! My, an' ye've give me a fine fright, young man! Come along in wid yeez. Didn't the doctor tell yez, not two hours ago, that yid run a risk, takin' cold, owin' to yer stayin' close indoors so long! An' some one may come down the stairs in half a jiffy for all ye can tell! Come in wid ye ! Judge dear, do make 'im come in! "But Jack was holding fast by the door frame." just loan me your arm, judge. I've been playin' off so long that I'd somehow got the idea 'twas all playin' off. But I guess I was hurt a bit--somewheres. Eh, Rox, my darlin' ? "" An' it's hurted ag'in ye'll be, sor, if ye don't march inside that door to wanst. There's not so much fightin' stuff in ye as ye may think, twixt bein' half kilt and playin' yer kilt altogether." And Pony Jack chuckled and flung us a jovial "good-night " across her shoulder as Roxy caught him by his two elbows and rushed him across the threshold.Truly, his was a quick recovery.CHAPTER XXXII
THE CRISIS IN SIGHTABOUT two o'clock a.m. the Deacon came to my room. He had some news that helped to link together parts already known. Mac' had told him that he knew "Sydney Starr " to be an assumed name, that she was a fugitive, but had lots of money, or knew where to get it. Mac', after avoiding her a long time, was now very anxious to get at her, but could not do so, as she had repeatedly refused to receive him, and never left Roxy's watchful care. His letters she had returned, the second unopened, that morning.Mac' had succeeded in persuading the veiled woman to help him get at the actress. She was to ask her to come to the cottage the following night, and if she came, she was to be detained--until the planned racket at the bank began and then she was to be forced to surrender a large amount of money or--abducted to a dug-out a few miles from town, occupied by a half-breed and his wife. This half-breed was to arrive at the cottage to warn them that the Indians were at the bank, and that no woman was safe. Then Mac' was to beg him to give the woman in the cottage shelter in his dug-out, etc., etc. If Miss Starr objected, chloroform would be used to make her helpless. At this I asked myself whether she might not accept to evade that New York, detective.The veiled woman, the Deacon said, was a puzzle to him, but he believed she was secretly planning to work more for herself than for Mac', and maybe against him. The Deacon himself was to represent Mac' at the cottage, who would not show himself until Miss Starr was at the dug-out. Mac' was not to be present at the bank robbery, nor at the attack on the jail. He wanted to see Pony Jack, but could not do so before late in the evening.And the veiled woman would not make a move to aid Mac', the Deacon continued, until she had proof that Mac' had seen Jack.When the Deacon was gone, I pondered deeply. Everything seemed to centre in Miss Starr, and she was in deadly peril. Surely the hour of necessity had come. I had a right, and I believed it was my duty, to open the letter. For was not her condition fulfilled ? Was not somebody in danger to come to harm--she herself ?To make sure, I got out her notes and read them again, and then I deliberately opened the envelope containing her secret and read.If in the following pages I relate more what happened around me, than what I did, the reader will understand that I, through reading Miss Starr's full narrative, was master of the situation, as far as I and my duties were concerned. All I had to do was to have a watchful eye on persons and things, and let them work out their destiny themselves, except for a little prompting and direction here and there by me, to spare shocks and heartaches to people that had already suffered enough.A case in point was the arrival of that private detective from New York, witnessed by me behind the

broad sheltering back of Jersey Pete, at the depot the next forenoon, and I knew him for the greatest humbug that ever borrowed glory from his fellows.Dan Drayton, this was his name, climbed in the 'bus of the hotel without seeing me, and I had a little talk with Jersey Pete, who confided to me that lie, and Tom, and Jerry, and Jim Griggs, and--yes, Utah, Mike's old bar-tender--and a few others, had decided to join Chief Barry's forces that night. " Fer, ye see," he said, "there's going to be shootin' sure, an' I'd rather shoot at them, that I'd bear a grudge, than for them, and them as I hate are all on t'other side."Soon after, the train bearing Allan Eversoll and his sister arrived, and I forgot, for a brief hour, all my responsibilities, all my anxieties, and welcomed them as if I were about to lead them to a palatial abode, and place in their hands the keys of the city.When I had them safely in Roxy's snug "parlour," I caught my friend by both his slim white hands, and looked at him with pleased eyes.He had not gained in flesh, and his face was still pale, but the langour was gone from his attitude, the listlessness from his countenance. His head drooped no longer, but was held erect. His mouth was firm, his whole face, though grave and still sad, had lost all trace of despondency. Indeed, it was the old look of happier days that so warmed my heart. The look of fixed purpose, which long ago I had learned to recognise, and from which to effect and result, often successful, was but a short step."Chum!" I exclaimed, "you are a new man--since our last meeting."He caught my arm between both his own. "It's not altogether due to doc," he said, a smile spreading, as of old, from his eyes to his lips, 11 it's the mind, I think,

quite as much as the medico. And the mind has been administered unto by you, old friend. You have awakened hope in my breast. I've an object in life, Carl, and I mean to pursue it--"" Allan ! " entreated Lettice, seeing the eagerness growing in his face." I know, Letty," he said. " It's not the time to talk, and I only meant to say that hope has been revived in me, and I mean to pursue my search until I find my lost wife, or her grave." He released my hand slowly, and turned to his sister. " There, Letty, we will let Carl talk for a little. And then we--at least I--will rest a bit; but, old man, don't forget that I shall expect to-night to see `the wickedest town out west,' in all its wickedness. Positively, I find my appetite for adventure waking up, and have come prepared to brave the lion and the tiger."" The tigress, doubtless," laughed Mrs. Carolyn.Mr. Masters, only think, that foolish boy actually sent out and bought a pair of pistols, and he has them loaded."" And may strap them on to-night if he is so minded," I replied; and then, when we had seated ourselves in Roxy's most comfortable chairs, I told them briefly the condition of things in the town, and what might be expected that night, unless the intervening hours brought wisdom to the insane mob, or a miracle occurred. I had from time to time given them, in my letters, brief accounts of the doings at Mike's; and Mrs. Carolyn had grown quite interested in my early report of Miss Starr's arrival and encounter with Mike Aiken.But I did not tell them that this " interesting creature " was now under the same roof with themselves, nor did I judge it wise, or fitting, that she and

Lettice Carolyn should meet--not yet at least. I told them more of Hubert Morton, of whom they had heard through my letters, and also of the killing of Mike Aiken, finishing with an account of the impending attacks upon the jail and the bank.When all was told--that I desired to tell--Allan Eversoll turned toward me a face aroused and animated beyond my hopes or expectations." Carl, if you had by any hocus pocus stopped us, say at Salt Lake City, I should have remembered it against you for ever. Your hands are indeed full, and let me say now--that I and my new arsenal are at your service to-night-and all night ! When we have rescued your man, and thwarted your bank robbers, then we will talk of my affairs. To-night it is 'hey for law and order!' old man ; when the turmoil is at an end and people breathe freely once more, I would like, if possible, to shake the hands of Chief Barry and the judge, and of Phil and Hubert Morton, of course."" And I," declared his sister, with eager, shining eyes, " I mean to shake hands with Pony Jack. And--oh, when am I to be presented to your good friend, Roxy Higgins ? "While the words dropped from her lips, Roxy's to me well-known tap was heard at the door, and Roxy herself opened it." Beggin' yer pardon, sir," she said, in her best company manner. " I must interrupt, for this note is jist come by the lad at the hotel, an' he's waitin' outside."A glance told me that the note she gave me was from the Deacon, and I opened it in haste." The 'dude' who dropped in from the east this a.m. has biz' with Miss Starr, and has tracked her to Roxy's. He will be there in person in half an hour unless you want him stopped. Order quick."I pondered for just a moment, then I looked over to Lettice Carolyn." Will you do me, and also Miss Starr, a favour ? " I asked." Anything within my power," she answered quickly.I turned at once to Roxy. " Tell the boy," I said, " that it will be all right," and then I performed the ceremony of introduction, adding, " Mrs. Carolyn has been wishing to see you, Roxy, and I hope you will come in presently and talk to her, and help her feel at home. Please keep an eye upon the street door for a short time, and if anyone asks for Miss Starr before I come out, put them in the dining-room, tell him you will call Miss Starr, and then call me. And, Roxy, oblige me by being very polite to the visitor."She withdrew, and I turned quickly toward my two friends. " I must ask you, both of you, to trust me in this matter. It's a strange thing I shall ask of you, and I can only say that I believe if you should decline to do this service you would regret to-morrow, when you will understand all the mysteries. Mrs. Carolyn, a New York detective whom I happen to know arrived this morning with a warrant for the arrest of Miss Starr. It is absolutely necessary, for half-a-dozen reasons, that she does not meet this man--until to-morrow. He has never seen her, but comes, of course, armed with what he believes to be her picture--what may be her picture. If you pretend to be Miss Starr he will be nonplussed ; he will not dare serve his warrant, and will be obliged to wire for instructions. And delay--a few hours now--is all we shall need."" But--can I carry out the role ? " asked Lettice. " Will I not blunder--through ignorance ? "" No. For you must refuse to talk with him, disclaim all knowledge of his purpose, and use a string

of French words in saying the little you will need to say. Miss Starr is supposed to be a Frenchwoman. Roxy, who will admit the man, will call you Miss Starr, and so will I, for I mean to be present."Be good enough to count on me also. You may need a cloud of witnesses," spoke Allan. " I think you may be quite easy, Carl ; Letty is a capital actress."And my role, then," she interposed, " is only to declare myself Miss Starr--if need be the Miss Starr--who has sung at Mike's, and beyond that to ignore his claims and express my scorn in French. I almost think I shall enjoy it ! You are sure this detective won't march me off to jail ? "" If I did not know my man, Mrs. Carolyn, I would not ask this thing of you. There will be no risk of that sort ! "" I was certain of it," she assured me. And with the look of confident reliance that shot from her eyes to mine, sinking deep into my treasury of happy memories, I went to instruct Roxy, and then straight to Miss Starr's door, speaking my name with my face close to the panel.She was very pale when she opened to me. And the look that met mine was a wordless inquiry.I told her as rapidly as possible of the coming visitor, and how we proposed to divert him, and send him away, for the night at least.She made no comment until I stopped, then she said:" Pardon me, but I fear I do not quite comprehend. Why does this New York officer seek me ?and with a warrant, too, you said."" There is too little time now for explanations," I replied. "Some enemy here has written to a New York detective agency, telling him that a certain actress, `a Frenchwoman,' much wanted by the

police, both here and abroad, may be found here under the name of Sydney Starr."" Ah ! " She threw back her head, and a look of actual relief came into her face. " How very kind of --someone ; only he should have written his letter sooner. So La Belle Francine, the Luvois, has been tracked through two continents. How much he must have feared me!" and now face and voice were bitter and full of contempt.Instantly my thoughts flew back to that night at Mike's, when, in his company, I overheard the interview in Box No. Io. She believed Philip Morton to have been her betrayer ; this I felt to be impossible. But before I could speak, she resumed" Bah ! I am tired of all this. You have been very kind, Mr. Masters, but it is not worth while to struggle. I will see this detective--why not? Let him take me back east. It is one thing to capture, another to prove ! And he has yet to prove me to be the French comedienne for whom a reward has stood so long. Yes, I will go ! I shall be glad to leave this place. And"--her voice suddenly falling, and the fire dying out of her face--" I am tired of it all." Then, as if struck by the consternation in my face, she added, almost gently : " I am not worth so much anxiety and effort, Mr. Masters ; and besides, believe me, I am not quite helpless. They will find it hard to prove my connection with that crime which so stirred Paris three years ago. Ah ! I have been at times, as you have seen, discouraged ; but it never lasts. No, I shall go east, and still farther east, maybe, but I shall not give up. They must prove their charges--all of them ! "" Miss Starr," I said, and she started at the change in my tone, " answer me this : Do you believe that

from the first moment of our meeting I have been your friend--true to your interests, and ready at all times to help and shield you ? "" Yes; oh, yes ! I believe in you."" Then listen ! I, like our newly-arrived friend, am an officer, only my authority comes from the city and the Government. I came here to clear up, if possible, some troublesome and baffling mysteries connected with the Railroad Company. I arrived you know when ; and I at once became interested in you, for I saw that you were not like the people you came among. There is no time for details. I can only tell you this. To-night there will be an attempt to lynch Hubert Morton, your most faithful friend and knight."" I know," she murmured. " Heaven forgive me! And I had forgotten him! "" This man who had come to arrest you is a fool. He will not arrest you quietly. In half an hour after your arrest it will be known all about town, and this would be the result : Your friends--and that you have many, you surely know--will desert the jail, and there will be a riot, for they will not leave you in the hands of that donkey; and by this means Hubert Morton's defence will be weakened, and harm may come to him. If you wished to weaken the arms of his defenders, you could take no better way, not to mention the probability that your unwise captor may also come to grief. Besides," I hurried on, "and this is an official secret, there is a plot to rob the late in-coming stage and the bank--the old bank--under cover of the attack upon the jail. They are not aware that the sheriff is informed of their plans, that he is preparing to foil them there also. The boys who will be first to flock to your defence, whether you will or not, are among Barry's most reliable deputies."" Oh! " she moaned, " surely there can't be anything more ? "" But there is ! " and then I told her of the woman at the cottage, and of the plots against her there." I am informed," I added, " that this young woman ' Val' will send a message asking you to come to her to-night, quite early. If you wish to help me, as well as yourself, you will go at the time appointed. It will be quite safe. I shall be near, and no harm shall come to you. The man Mac' will be there also."She looked up quickly, her eyes lighting up with the anticipation of a duel of wit against a scoundrel's craftiness. " I will go," she said, "willingly. Do you know, may I ask, what Mac' intends ? "" He believes you to be Francine de Luvois, and he means to levy blackmail."" And do--do you think he has any real knowledge that I am--"She stopped suddenly, adding: " Who I am ? " I shook my head for answer.Then in a low voice I said : " Then it is quite understood ? You are to keep your room, to see no one except the Green woman. If she comes after you, go with her, first telling Roxy what you are about to do. To-morrow I will try to explain--many things, if you wish it. As to what Mac' believes or knows, I am not well informed ; and I owe it to you to add that it would be hypocrisy to discuss the question of your identity now, because, Miss Starr," and here again I held her gaze with my own, " when I got the message informing me of the coming of this detective, I at once opened and read your letter ; and although you were careful to suppress all names, I know who you are."" You do?""Have no fear. I shan't be the one to betray you."CHAPTER XXXIII
A FARCICAL INTERLUDEWHEN I came downstairs, I found Allan alone in the parlour. I took him into the dining-room, where we could be undisturbed, and told him now all about Mac's plots and Miss Starr's eventful career in Cheyenne. Of course, this took a big time, and before we had decided whether Allan should accompany me that night, which he wished to do, the door bell rang."Now! " said I, and catching up my hat and the cigar placed in waiting beside it, I opened the dining-room door a bit, and in a moment stepped lazily out."That's the post boy, Mrs. Higgins ? " I queried, and then, " Bless King George ! I can't be mistaken in you, Dan Drayton ! " I cried, as if I Lad stumbled upon my best friend.He welcomed me with princely cordiality. He was dressed for the part of the fine gentleman officer, and as I was not, he patronised me accordingly. And I soon had him in the dining-room, and was introducing him to " Mr. Allan of California."" I'd ax yez to take the gintleman into the parlour, sor," ventured Roxy diffidently, from the doorway, "but Miss Starr was expectin' a gintleman to call the day, an' so I promist it to her."" Nevah mind the pawlah, my good soul," replied Mr. Drayton. "And I'm glawd to heah that Miss

Staw is at home, as I happen to be the gentleman she is looking fow," and then he laughed so hilariously that a joke was obvious, and Allan, who was quite at home with so farcical a situation as this promised, cried at once:" There's a joke! Come, I'm sure of it. Masters, make him tell us."And thus encouraged, we soon had the story, being first, of course, bound to secrecy, with much mystery. And then--while we inwardly writhed--Drayton gave the history of Francine de Luvois, and displayed the warrant for her arrest.Looking across at Allan as the narrative came to an end, I became, on my own part, a willing martyr. For he had forgotten for the moment his own sad, case, and really looked and seemed like his old-time self."And you think she really did it?" he questioned, open-eyed and admiring."Shuah thing ! A red-handed murderer, or there nevah was one. I only hope there'll be no hysterics. I hate that sawt of thing, ye know!""Gee!" I said in my turn. " I don't envy you your job. These Frenchwomen are treacherous, though she don't look it--eh, Drayton ? " I hazarded." Nevah saw the dear creature," replied Drayton, and we both felt relieved."Going to serve your paper now? " I asked carelessly."Shuah thing ! Couldn't risk so slippery a prisonah. Had too much of that kind, you know! "And then, while I made a show of half-hearted disapproval, for Dan Drayton knew my business methods, Allan rattled off a string of reasons why a new-comer should not "get into a box," especially he

should be free to take in the town on that night of all others ; and when he had whetted the fellow's curiosity, he dropped his voice to a mysterious whisper, and told of the " roaring" time likely to " strike the city" before midnight. " They mean business, ye know, both sides! " he declared, as if he relished the prospect. "This is no New York row, where there are two coppers to every citizen. If you want to see the 'wild west' at its wooliest, you want to see it to-night ! "But his words had not the seemingly desired effect, and his final argument brought the crisis." This home," quoth Allan, "is the one home in this town that can be banked on for safety to-night. Even the cowboys, the very toughest, swear by 'Denny Higgins' widow.' She's everybody's friend, and everybody's hers." Allan was doing well." Yaas ! So they said at the--well, I suppose it's a sort of hotel ? "" Yep ! That's it," I said cheerfully." We-ell, gentlemen," rising and taking up his hat, "I'm glad, an' fer the--er--young woman's sake, that this house is safe for her, you know. But I'm more than evah bound to serve my papers, you know! Such a creachaw might so easily get up a rescue gang if she got a word of warning, and she'd be wahned, shuah, if I waited ! "" Why--who's going to know?"" Er--well--these things get out somehow, you know, and then, having no time to lose, I didn't--aw--disguise my business, and, of coas, I had to inquiah fow the lady--ha, ha ! "" Of co-as," murmured Allan, and Roxy was called forthwith, and, awed and respectful, she took his message to "Miss Sydney--aw--Starr.""And--aw--my good woman, remembah you are merely to say that the gentleman has come, and awaits her in the pawlah."" Yis, sor. Thanky, sor," and Roxy " ducked," thereby nearly upsetting my gravity, and went cumbrously upstairs.Behind Drayton's back, Allan looked at me perplexedly. It had been no part of our plans to leave Lettice Carolyn to face this ill-bred dude alone. I caught up my hat, and began to "mouth" a fresh cigar.Well, I hope you'll not have an unpleasant half hour with the lady," I said carelessly. " By the way, Allan, have you heard about her target shooting out at the fort, and how she went for--"" Oh, beg pahdon, Masters ! Ah you p'ticulahly busy just now ? ""Why no, if I can do you a favour, Dan. Is there any--""I was just thinking--aw--that she might be a bit bettah impressed if one of you gentlemen would sort of just mention me to her by name, you know; my full official title, as it were," he ended, with a sickly grin.Of course we obliged him, and I led the way to the parlour." Is--aw--is she a good looker ? " the fellow asked. Haven't you got a picture ? " I asked, as if surprised." Why, cert ! " producing a couple of photographs; the one a profile, the other a costume picture. I took them from his hand and glanced at them. At the same moment Allan, half forgetting his rle, turned and looked out, attracted by something or someone upon the street.Looking over his shoulder I saw Lieutenant Morton passing the window, and, I thought, toward the door, and then a look through the purposely left open parlour door showed me Roxy hovering at the foot of the stairway. I felt sure we could trust Roxy's quick Irish wit, and then Allan spoke"Masters, come here. Is not this Phil Morton going up the steps ? "With the pictures held in my half-closed hand, as if quite forgotten for the moment, I joined him at the window."Yes," I said, "it is Morton," and then I held the pictures before him, saying: " If that is Miss Starr's picture she has changed greatly," and I went back to Drayton."Yes," Allan echoed, in a slow sort of mumble, "she must have changed a lot.""Hush!" spoke Drayton sharply, like an officer in command, and we heard a voice at the head of the stairs saying:"Are you sure the caller is for me, Roxy ? Why, I did not expect my friend so early." She was descending the stairs as she spoke. "The parlour, did you say? "I had heard the street door, and Roxy's voice in unintelligible greeting; and now we all three saw, from our place of vantage, a clever tableau, and a pretty one, arranged, as it was, upon the instant, and between utter strangers. But Roxy was a host in herself.Lettice Carolyn had reached the foot of the stairs, and there she stood, a different Lettice Carolyn from the one who had so lately left us.With all her fair, soft hair piled upon her dainty head, now held high and proudly. With her dark,

out-of-door gown exchanged for trailing skirts of a pale violet hue, with her fair face rising from a bodice of violet and willowy greens, all fluffing from neck to wrist, she presented a picture good to see. The picture of a chic Frenchwoman.She stood a moment upon the lowest stair step, and then, letting her beruffled skirts drop from one little bejewelled hand, she seemed waiting."Ah, good morning, Miss Starr ! " said Philip Morton's full, manly voice, and we saw him advance and bow above the hand she had extended, directed, as we could guess, by Roxy in the background, and then a rich brogue broke in" I ixpect Mr. Braddock do be ixpecting ye, Mr. Morton, sor, if ye'11 come this way ; an' yer frind, Miss Starr, honey, he's in the parlour beyant.""Thank you, Roxy. Mr. Morton"--I could catch the twinkle in her eye--"I hope your friend will be better this morning. Present him my good wishes for his health, please," and then she swept in among us.What followed came near to broad farce, and the look on Dan Drayton's face as he gazed upon this apparition was broadest comedy."There is some mistake," he declared. " Miss Starr, the--the lady who calls herself Miss Starr, is a different--looking person--quite different."" Monsieur, 'tis I who call myself Miss Starr," she said, with her head uplifted."But--aw--really, you know, Miss Starr--my Miss Starr is French, and--""And, pray, am I not French, monsieur ? And how is it that you so presume to call me your Miss Starr ? "And then in despair he drew out the two pictures. At sight of these she started, but rallied at once."Bah ! " she cried. " They are not my pictures. Someone has deceived you, sir.""No, look ! " he cried in bewilderment. "They are both from Paris, with the signature of the French chief of police upon each, and the name Francini--""Francini ! Ah, ha ! Very good, monsieur. But who is this Francini ? I do not know the person," and so it went on, with Drayton more and more confused. I suggested that Drayton should defer matters until next day, and in the meantime he might telegraph the situation to the New York office, and to this he finally consented, being quite without other recourse." But I shall run no risks, he said. " Your friend 'Roxy,' as you call her, must give me a room in this house. I must stay here to-night--really I must."And at my request, Roxy gave him a room at the end of the house, near where the judge was quartered, and as far as possible from the apartments of Roxy and the rooms of Sydney Starr, both the sham and the real.When he was assured of a safe shelter for what promised to be a "rough night abroad," the relief upon his face was almost ludicrous, and although he assured us that he would not miss the " little excitement, not for money," I felt as certain as possible that "Officer Dan Drayton" would not tempt an unkind fate by going from Roxy's safe roof after the falling of the twilight."I'd like nothing bettah than to see the whole thing with you two ; but it will be too conspicuous for me, and I might want to burrow a bit."We assured him of his wisdom, and having obtained a promise of good behaviour from " Miss Illustration in body of Lawrence Lynch's "A Woman's Tragedy""'Bah,' she cried, 'They are not my pictures. Someone has deceived you, Sir!' "
Starr," and appointed Roxy her must willing guardian, he went forth to report the strange "fact" that Miss Starr of the Cheyenne theatre was not the Miss Starr of the Paris photographs.We were glad to be rid of him, and Lettice Carolyn, when we had closed the door upon him, turned to us in wrath."To think," she cried, "that I have made a pyramid of my head, and arrayed myself like a Tony Pastor soubrette, and all to face that--that man of straw ! It is too much; plotters that you are ! And he didn't even produce his warrant ! I have not even been arrested!" And she ran away laughing to resume the attire of civilised and humdrum everyday life.As we passed the door of Roxy's sitting-room a little later on our way to the street, she called to me, and leaving Allan in the hall with his cigar, I went in." I want just to ask ye about Miss Sydney, sor," the good soul whispered. "Such a change as has come over her ; she's that excited. An' she says to me: `Tell me the truth, Roxy Higgins ! There was a stranger in the hall just now. Who is it? What brings her here? Has she asked for me? Mind, I will not see anyone ! Roxy, you must let me get away from this house; let me go out by your back stairway.' ' And where would ye go, child?' says I, an' she says : `Back to the theatre. Norah McAllister will take me in, or Lora ;' an' then I just soothed her as best I could, tellin' her that there was jist some stranger, a couple jist come by the express from out west way, an' they'd be goin' on in a few days. Sure you don't think she's got the notion that the woman down at the Green woman's

is come here, an' that the child's afeart of her, the trollop?" For Roxy by now was familiar with much of our plotting, as needs must, since her aid was so essential and so sure, and she knew the story of the inmate of the cottage, too, as well as I knew it myself.It had seemed wisest to tell her this story in full, because we foresaw the possibility of a visit from " that Green creature," and the certainty of her icy reception, unless Roxy were impressed with the wisdom of making her " a bit welcome "--to the extent, at least, of admitting her to the outer hall.But while Roxy knew so much of the local "celebrities" with whom I had become in some measure entangled, I had not enlightened her regarding Allan Eversoll and his sister, beyond informing her that they were old and near friends." It's a quare thing," soliloquised Roxy, as I was about to return to Allan, " how women in trouble fight shy of wan another. Now I was thinking to myself how nice to have another swate young leddy in the house, and clost by her, and was meanin' to speak about the same, whin, whoa ` Roxy,' says she, " I--I heard a strange voice in the passage. Who is it? When did she come, an' for what?' an' her eyes as big an' scared-lookin'. To think o' being scairt at that wee bit little body, so sweet and kind spoken!""And what did you tell her?" I questioned.Roxy laughed softly. " What, for sure, but that the party was o' the right sort, she might be certain, for they came here at your express invite.""And then ?" I again urged."Thin--thin nothin' at all, sor. She just turned toward the windy, an' says, `Thank ye, Roxy,' in a sort of little, all-gone voice, an' with her face turned clear away. An' knowing her ways by this time as

I do, I went out soft like, an' I heard her come still softer an' lock her door on the inside, as if we were all burglin' sinners 'stead o' her good friends, wan an' all. She says she won't come to the table whilst the strangers are in the house, and I've promised to send up her meals. Anything to plaise the poor child."It suited me well that Miss Starr should seek to avoid the new-comers, and this I briefly stated to Roxy, adding a promise of full explanations later." An, glad Oi'll be to hear 'em," she declared.Not bein' curious--which I ain't--but I've got that befoozled what with this an' that, I can't aven eat comfortable."CHAPTER XXXIV
AN OLD LETTERJACK BRADDOCK lay upon a low couch drawn near a window, and beside him sat Lieutenant Morton, who arose at our entrance, and recognised Allan after one searching glance." Don't name me," my friend said; " I want to see how much I have changed in ten years, or nearly that."But the eyes of friendship are keen, and college friends are strong friends, when the attachment is real and mutual.When I had named Eversoll to Jack, I let the two friends continue apart. while I took Morton's place beside the couch.Pony Jack was showing most rapid progress toward recovery, and he put out a hand and greeted me with a twinkle in his keen grey eyes. A light covering was thrown across the couch, but as he turned toward me and upon his side, he threw it back, and I saw he was dressed, and needing only shoes and a coat to be ready for the streets." So," said Jack, in a voice by no means weak, " Roxy tells me that I did not fool you, and she takes a lot of pride in it, I can tell ye ! She's been my partner, you must know, from the first day, But I had to make confession to her almost on my knees, and it's been her one solid comfort and glory

that she has known from the first what no one else save myself could tell. She's been whist enough, too, I bet, outside that door; but, oh, my eye ! what swelling and ruffling I've had to witness from Roxy over the secret she was helping me keep! " and Pony Jack stifled a laugh while looking across at the stranger now conversing with Philip Morton." Old pards ? " he asked, dropping his voice, and as I nodded, he resumed : " I'm powerful glad my 'convalescence,' as doc calls it, is so near over. It's been the hardest job I ever tackled ; but I couldn't see any other way of holding my tongue, and," he glanced across at the others, "it had to be held.""And now?"" Now," he said, " I want some advice. I ain't posted, not at all points, and I'm blamed uneasy and worried about that fellow, Hube Morton. You see, I know the crowd that's after him, and they're bad. They'll stop at nothing, once they get on the trail," he paused, and his eyes met mine." You know--" he began, and then paused, waiting." I know," I said, " that you know more than any other man about Mike Aiken's death, and that the man MacIntyre shares your knowledge. I know, too, that he is eager to see you.""Yes?" Jack was smiling wickedly." And that he means to come to-day, if possible." " To-night, by doc's orders."" Do you know what he wants or fears?" " Do you? " and again he smiled. I shook my head." I think," said Jack, " that he is in doubt about me. He wants to find out how much I know, and how I mean to use my knowledge--eh ? ""Did you ever meet this man ' Mac,' as he calls

himself, before he came to this place? " I questioned."Yep," said Jack promptly."And has he any good reason for shunning you?""Um-m. That depends. He is a bit uneasy about me, I can see that. I don't bear him any love."" There's a woman in the Green Cottage, the same who came on a certain morning--ah ! I see you remember. Mac' calls her Val."" Val ! " Jack lifted himself suddenly. " Val. Are you sure of the name ? "" Quite."" And she--Val--is still there ? ""Yes. Jack, I want to tell you a story ; but first I must know--this woman Val--is she anything to you ? "" She's a woman I knew back in God's country. I never loved her, and I don't know but I may have cause to hate her. She wrote me a note, and signed another name. Not long after she wrote again, and said she was going--going back.""And Mac'?" I questioned." We have never met face to face.""Jack, are you a friend to Sydney Starr ? A true friend, willing to stand up for her at need? ""Try me! Give me the chance ! Yes, I am her friend. I have been a fool, but I have had my lesson. What can I do for Sydney Starr ? ""And Hubert Morton? Are you a friend to him?"" I am not his enemy. Why am I here if not to help him ? Come, Masters, let's understand each other."" With all my heart." I got up and drew the white curtains across the lower window panes so that I could see the street entrance and be myself unseen.I spoke a few words to Eversoll and the lieutenant, and they withdrew to Roxy's dining-room to await me. Then I went back to the window and began to talk, and as I proceeded, Pony Jack threw off his coverings and half arose, presently sitting erect, and finally jumping to his feet and striding, with a slight limp, up and down the little room.While I talked I saw a woman's figure mount the steps and heard the bell ring. I heard Roxy's brisk steps hastening down the hall, and a movement upon the stairs, but though I talked for a full half hour and then listened, and answered query after query, I did not see the woman leave the house.When at last I arose to go, Jack grasped my hand with impulsive fervour." I owe you, and half-a-dozen others, any possible service for your charitable willingness to believe the best where so much of the `worst' was in evidence, and you may trust me to deal with one detail, at least, of this night's business. I'll take care of Jerry MacIntyre ! And I'll pull his teeth beyond any power to harm either Hube Morton or that poor girl. Trust me." And then a queer smile overspread his face, and he brought his hand against his thigh with a resounding slap." What is it? " I questioned." Holy smoke! I threw away my pistols in that old cellar ! I ain't got a weapon ! "I put my hand to my hip, and produced a pair of small but certain six-shooters. " I have been a walking arsenal all day," I assured him.As I was about to go, the door was opened quickly, and Miss Starr came hurriedly in. She passed me with the merest nod, and pausing directly before Pony Jack, said, in low, hurried tones, but quite composedly:" Pardon me ; is your name Jack R. Braddock ? Is it, at least, the name you have borne for some years?" "Yes 'm." Jack looked startled." And--please answer me candidly--were you in in New York three years ago? "I--was, for a short time." Here Jack grinned."And--later--you were in New Orleans--two months later? ""It's er fact--sure ! "She came a step near him. " Until quite lately I had no thought that you were the man for whom I have carried a message almost three years. I only learned two days ago that your name was Braddock. And only to-day--now--that you were the Jack Braddock for whom this letter was meant."She was holding out to him a small envelope, and as he took it wonderingly, she turned away, and approached me where I stood beside the door.I had been watching the face of Pony Jack, and wondering what this new complication--if such it should prove--could mean, when he uttered a sharp cry, and I saw his face grow pale and then flush hotly." Miss Starr--one moment, if you please ! " His tone was almost a command, and she turned. " You knew the writer of this I " holding up the letter still unopened." Yes."And--you know--is it true--" He paused. " Is she dead ? "" Yes."" Thank you. May I speak with you after I have read this ? "" If you wish."With a muttered word of thanks he broke the seal,

and turning away began to read what was evidently a long letter. I was about to leave the room, but Miss Starr put a hand upon my arm."I wanted to tell you," she said, in a low half-whisper, " the summons has come. I am asked to go to the cottage of which you spoke, in a message half appeal, half threat. The woman came as you said she would."I saw her; but--where is she ? "Gone. I am not wanted until early this evening. She will come again. But--"" You need not fear to go with the woman ; you will not be out of sight of your friends, have no fear.""And what is their plan?""To kidnap you.""And--yours? "To catch them red-handed, to unmask them through you, or by your aid ; and further, I trust we shall enable you to leave this place at your pleasure, and as a free woman.""But this detective--the warrant? Ah, I know!" She caught her breath shudderingly. " Ah ! if I could leave this place--escape all these horrors without--" She checked herself at the sound of Jack Braddock's voice."Miss Starr," he was saying, "can you give me half an hour--now, right away?She looked up, and I nodded." Courage," I whispered, as I left them. " I think I can at least promise that the detective and his warrant will fail." And I went out quietly.CHAPTER XXXV
THE TEMPEST BREAKSWHEN Allan and I reached the Lindholm, where I wished to go to get ready for the night's serious work, the clerk handed me a letter from New York, which I read in astonishment, and thrust in my pocket, to be used on Dan Drayton at the proper moment.Arrived in my room, I took out of my trunk, among other things, the little package of jewellery, carefully enveloped. I asked Allan to take them out and make a small, flat package to put in my pocket. I had hardly bent over my trunk again before I heard him cry out: "Good God!"Turning, I saw him sitting thunderstruck, gazing at the glittering objects in his hand." Carl Masters," he said, " where did you get these jewels? "" Found them, as before said."" Where and when? "" Here, upon the street near this very house upon the day of my arrival here ! Why? ""Because these jewels were my wife's--a portion of my wedding gift." He dropped weakly down upon the bed, saying presently, " Tell me all about it."As briefly as possible I told him of that first night at Mike's, and of my adventure with MacIntyre. " Describe this man--Mac'."I did so, and he shook his head." I do not recognise him, but I must see him."I think it more than probable that he is at Roxy's, closeted with Pony Jack. I am not sure that it will be feasible or wise to try and bring you together to-night, but--the woman--"" Ah ! you have seen her ? "" Only from a hole in the floor above her room. I could not see her features clearly."" But--you can tell--something ? "She is young, of medium height, and, without doubt, graceful and beautiful."He sprang up with a sudden look of determination. " Come," he said, " let us go there at once ! " " Upon one condition ! "" Name it.""There is much at stake ; not one issue, but several. You must promise to be guided by me--in everything. Surely you can trust me ? "" I can trust you surely! But, Carl, tell me, are you going to subordinate my interests--make my horrible suspense secondary to the welfare of this Frenchwoman, this actress ? Oh, yes, I know she is a woman ! She is friendless--she may be innocent ; but I, Carl--I am your friend--your long-time friend--"" My best and dearest friend, Allan," I answered. " Be easy ! If need be, I promise to throw up all other interests save yours. Only--I must have your promise."" You have it, then," and he held out his hand. While I was closing and locking the door of my room, the Deacon appeared at my side. He glanced up and down the hall, and then spoke." Masters, I can't explain it, but I have just learned

that since noon Pony Jack has sent for Jersey Pete and his gang--you know the crowd ? ""Yes," I replied, " I know ; a handful of good fellows, worth fifty hoodlums."" Well, Roxy Higgins sent for Pete, and laid down the law to him--it appears ; and the result is they are all, somewhere, ready to take their orders from Jack Braddock or Roxy, I don't quite know which, and surely don't know why. See the point--eh ? ""Only a rough guess, Deacon. But if it's Braddock, Roxy and Jersey's crew, it's a good combination, and we shall hear from them soon. Which way?"" Didn't you know ? I'm to go with `Miss Green' as bodyguard for Miss Starr. They didn't dare take her across town before dark, you know. So long ! "Early in the evening a small body of mounted men rode out from the enclosure, from which point a portion of their number rode to and fro as if upon patrol-duty." It's going to be just a walk-over," reported a young ruffian with a bloated face, as he made his way among the groups about Mike's bar and tables." They don't guess what they're in for up there, and Mr. Chief Barry'll get his comb-out in fine shape eh, pard ? "But the spy--for such he was, or thought himself--did not know that along an old secret trail a long file of armed soldiers were walking quickly into certain backyards near the jail, and that the cottages fronting the jail--dark, most of them, or with just a twinkle of light in a front window--were fast filling with blue-coated forms, silent and spoiling for a fight.They had not meant to "do their work quietly," this throng of armed ruffians that, when the signal

was given, came thronging out into the street before Mike's, and formed into a straggling line and faced toward the upper town. There were no names spoken, and many of the men had made awkward attempts at disguising in too conspicuous garments, by reversing coats, tying on masks of bandannas, red or blue, scraps of black, or ghostly squares of white cotton, through which bleared eyes gleamed savagely.There had been some attempt at organisation, and a definite plan of attack ; and now, as they swung toward the cross street, the shrill note of a horn brought them to a halt.A burly man, tightly buttoned into a reefer, and with half of a flaming red bandanna tied tightly across his face, shouted : " It's time for business ; and we want to be sure that we're ready, all of us. When a man's friends can't git justice, then it's time to act. Now, lissen wot to do ! Boys, don't git rattled ; don't break ranks too soon. Get everybody outside for a parley first, an' then--you fellers that's got your work cut out for you, remember, it's the quick rush that does it ! And the first lamp-post is good enough. Are ye all ready ? "There was a chorus of yells ; knives and pistols were swung aloft, and so were half-a-dozen coils of rope. And then, at the word, the crowd moved on, faster now, and every moment growing more boisterous and more bloodthirsty.And now they have reached the jail, and for the moment are held in check by the few mounted soldiers who bar the way, their ready hands resting on their weapons.Upon one side two score of men sit statue-like ; upon the other nearly two hundred yelling demons

waste their strength as maniacs do; and, above all, the voice of the leader bellows the command" Bring out the tenderfoot Johnny that shot a better man in the back, and in the dark ! We want him ! We're bound to have him! " And in answer, clear and stern, comes the reply from the lips of Chief Barry, standing alone in the full light of his open office-window above them:" The man whom you want is my prisoner. You will never take him while I am alive. In the name of the law, I command you to disperse peaceably!"And now the cries are renewed and redoubled. The throng presses close about the building.The cavalrymen, in two steadfast lines, extended across the entire front of the building, draw their weapons, and the front line moves forward slowly, steadily.And then the officer in charge of the cavalry troop speaks with a voice of authority" Men, we have our orders ; we are to guard the jail. You understand?"" We won't hurt the jail; we won't--"" And we are also to protect Sergeant Hubert Morton. If you attempt to break our line, we must ride you down ; if you try force, we shall not spare you.While he speaks, the men in the rear, at the left of the jail, begin to draw aside, and slowly, crouching and keeping close together, they pass down the side-street. Past the side entrance and behind the heels of the horses of the soldiers, who, for some reason, have faced inward, those supporting the left, and toward the south, so that they form an angle, and look straight before them upon the front ranks of the mob." The cussed fools ! " growls a squat, long-armed

miner, with a lurch in his gait. "They don't seem to see us pass square under their noses ! Dummy soldiers 'd be just as good.""Don't be so previous," whispered his soberer neighbour. " We may not be so swart as we feel ! If them doys didn't see us, I'll miss my drinks for a month. They don't want to see us, and--h-e-ll ! "The speakers were amongst the last of the chosen number who had marched in the rear, and were assigned to the task of breaking into the jail at the back, while those in front diverted the chief and his posse.The onslaught had been promptly made, but the result was amazement, confusion, and defeat to the attacking party, for at the first wrench there was the crack of fire-arms, the flash of knives, the thrust of bayonets. It was the bayonet that suddenly turned the scale at the moment when ready hands threw a glow of light upon the strange scene, from the jail on the one hand, and the cottages on the other. It was well planned, or it was an inspiration ; it was long before anyone knew which, and it was Phil Morton's voice that issued the orders. And before the second window had been broken in, or the first door forced, the soldiers, at a steady trot, with bayonets held low, and gleaming like great teeth, were upon them, surrounding them, driving them like sheep around the corner.When the defeated and bewildered crowd reached the point in front of the chief's window, the aggressive bayonets were halted, the attacking party were allowed to stand, while all looked wonderingly up at the window, where but the moment before a second figure suddenly appeared beside the chief.It was Hubert Morton, and at sight of him a yell

went up from the lips of the mob, a cheer from the blue-coats.With a hand upon the shoulder of the chief, he leaned far out above the crowd, and spoke" My friends, I ask you to hear me! I have thus far allowed my champions and protectors to have their way, but it was because I believed that only by so doing could trouble have been avoided. But I cannot remain in hiding and know that my friends are protecting me at the risk of their own safety. You believe me guilty--some of you--of the death of Mike Aiken, and upon this subject I have now nothing to say, save that in all my life I never shot at a human being, save in self-defence. Still, rather than let another shot be fired, I would fling myself from this window, and let you do with me as you would, for to allow this to go on would be to make of myself a murderer indeed." Still, I do not court death, and I make you this proposition. I will accept the word of honour of your leaders, and give myself up to them to be your prisoner until after my trial, after which we may be able to understand each other's motives, and gauge each other's sincerity. It is my word against that of you all that I offer. What say you ? "His voice rang clear ; his head was held high. He was as calm as if before a single examiner.As he paused, a voice from the crowd--the coarse voice of the leader--called out : " And what if we don't take yer bluff, hey ? "" Then," he suddenly pushed the chief aside, and the next instant stood alone, with a revolver in either hand, " then I shall come down these stairs, as I now stand, and out at the street door. You are a hundred to one and more; but when I shall have passed these

gallant horsemen--and they will let me pass them--I shall be among you. You will take me, of course. but," and he lifted the pistols, " there will be twelve less of you when I have done with these."" Hip, hip, hurrah ! hurrah for Hube Morton! and confusion to his enemies! "It was a clarion note, and it came at the instant when the breathless half second of silence that followed young Morton's speech gave it full and strong emphasis. And then, forcing its way through the mob, and on until they had reached the line of horsemen still holding their place at the front, came a group so strange, yet familiar, that the mob promptly opened a way, and the horsemen received them with open ranks. First came Jersey Pete, and behind him half-a-dozen others ; and in their midst, bound hand and foot, with what might have been identified as Roxy's clothes line, walked, or was pushed along, the man MacIntyre, looking the beaten, cringing coward he was.Close behind this crowd came another, and these carried aloft upon their shoulders, smiling, and as if in triumph, Pony Jack Braddock, one hand swinging above his head his gaily tasselled sombrero, and he shouted as he came his loud and confident "hurrah!"Mac' had called on Jack, it was evident, at the appointed hour in Roxy's house, where he had been made a prisoner.
CHAPTER XXXVI
PONY JACK'S SPEECHIN such moments it is often the unexpected, the unprepared, that wins.Jack Braddock, on the shoulders of his escort, reached the front, and the next moment, passing suddenly from the shoulders of his bearers to the back of a well-trained cavalry horse, he stood aloft, poised with all the grace and unconcern of the best rider of the plains, a bronco buster of the first water, and before the leaders of the daunted mob could rally their forces, his voice rang clear above the clamour and din" Men, cowboys, miners, all of ye, I want ye to hear me! If you want the solid truth about the killing of Mike Aiken, I am the man that can tell it! I was there ; I saw the deed done; and when I've told ye my story, ye can go ahead and hang the chap that killed Aiken." He paused, and seemed to be peering about him. " I wish we had a bit more light here, but never mind -- only, boys," turning to address the line of cavalrymen beside him, "if I am interrupted, ye can feel pretty sure that the fellow's got a good--a bad reason for tryin' to stop me, an' the quicker ye clap yer hands on him the better 'twill be fer law an' order, an' maybe fer yer humble servant."" Go ahead, Jack," called the sheriff, who now

appeared on the steps of the jail, " I'll 'tend to the interruptions."" Ye've turned out, the heft of ye, with the hue an' cry of `Justice !' And ye want to lynch a man for 'killin' Mike Aiken,' as we've all been 'customed to call him hereabouts. Now you've known Mike Aiken, some of ye, for years, as many years as he's been out here. But I knowed him before he became Mike Aiken, when he lived back in God's country, and slung liquor across a bar that had no theatrical attachment, and wasn't his own.I knew him later, when he owned his own bar in the Tenderloin district of New York city ; and last, I knew him when I saw him for the first time behind his own bar, at his own `theatre,' and was told that he was `Mike Aiken,' a man from St. Louis."Since that time," he continued, "'Mike Aiken' and me have had a little private understandin' of our own ; and there's been times when Mike has been sort of uneasy on my account. I s'pose it was for old acquaintance's sake that he began, after a time, to sort of confide in me, and knowing him so well, I soon got to know--I couldn't help it--that my old friend had more irons in the fire than were forged an' hammered down there at his theatre, cafe, bar-room, etc., etc., and that these interests extended outside of town, out into the mines, an' up into the mountains." For a long time all was grist that came to Mike's mill, while many misfortunes happened to others. A gang of scalawag speculators got in their work and squeezed and froze out a good number of young fellers, and while Mike ` happened' to get hold of some good claims and mining chances, there was so many fake claims sold, and so many salted mines, that people got waked up about it."'Twas about this time that Aiken, as we'll still call him, pulled out of the claim and salted mine business !"About this time a band of highway robbers began to get in their work hereabouts to such an extent that it soon became the idea that nothing was safe in this region. This gang never overlooked anything, from stage coaches to chickens on the roost, and by-and-by again things began to get warm, for when these fellows took to holdin' up the overland steam cars, lootin' the express an' shootin' the trains hands, some of the long-headed rogue-catchers back in God's country began to take a hand." It was about this time that Mike and I had our first little difference since we had come together out here. I was so well posted that Mike felt the need of getting, if not a halter, at least a bit of a string on me somehow, and we differed. I won't go into details, it ain't necessary ; I dropped him a word of warnin', in pure good-nature, but as I wouldn't put my foot in his little snare, he decided that when the right time came I must be downed." He knew my weak point--two of 'em, in fact--and he made a play at bein' friendly, and kept the bottle under my nose on all possible occasions. And this brings us up to a week or so before the night when Mike Aiken set a trap for another, and got in the way when the bolt was sprung." Not long ago," Jack's clear voice went on, " I found that big wheels were turning, with little wheels buzzing loud to drown out the big. I had been in an ugly state of mind, and was in a fair way to make trouble for myself and others, when something brought me up short. I had been trying to pick a quarrel, a drunken man's quarrel, with that man up

there," pointing up to where Hubert Morton now sat in the open window, with Chief Barry towering just behind him, " for no good reason save that I was looking for trouble; and just when I was ripe for mischief a little thing, a series of little things, a word and a look, the one uttered a shade too loud, the other darted before my very face, aroused my first suspicion. To learn more I had only to feign a little more than my real intoxication, and after that, for a week, while I was never seen sober--by Mike Aiken--I was never once drunk, and so I learned much." Jack paused here, and with an entire change of look and tone turned and motioned to Jersey Pete."Jersey," he said sternly, "bring up your prisoner and keep him where he can be seen." Then, turning again toward the crowd : "Now I will just speak of the first plot. This had to do with a robbery, a night attack, and every man for himself. The other was the scheme of a cur. Yes, a cur, my friends ! Miss Sydney Starr had been too strong to be made the servant of this man's will. She had too much spirit and too many real friends, and when he found she had determined to leave his place, he plotted to compel her to continue in his service or suffer at his hands."On the night when he met his death Miss Starr received a decoy letter, so worded that she might be drawn from her room to listen for a moment to what a friend wished to say to her. The letter was a forgery, and the name of an honest man, which was signed to it, was a forgery. Mike knew that it would not do to ask this young lady to go far from her own door, so the letter named the vacant lot next to her dwelling as the place of meeting. The success of this man's plan depended much upon the time and the

exact moment of Miss Starr's appearance at the place appointed." Now Mike had counted upon me to help out this plot, and to this end had put into my hand, earlier in the evening, a copy of the letter sent to Miss Starr, and like hers, except that the hour in the last forgery was later by thirty minutes than was that in the first." Now this was what Mike Aiken hoped would happen. He knew that Hubert Morton had frequently followed Miss Starr home from the theatre at a respectful distance, and he knew that there was jealousy between young Morton and myself, and hard words and threats. He had two confederates to help him to carry out the abduction plan. One of them was this shrivelled-up specimen here who calls himself MacIntyre, the other was the half-breed known as Long Sam.Prompt at the moment these men were to be ready. As Mike had it planned, Miss Starr would arrive on time, and be chloroformed and carried off with ease and despatch, and a little later Morton would make his round, whereupon I was expected to pounce upon him ; and if one of us was left on the field, maimed or dead, so much the better for Mike's plans. The forged note would turn up somewhere, and the Mortons would become the scapegoats when Mike raised the hue-and-cry for Miss Starr." This was the plan. Now hear what happened. Early in the evening I fell asleep in the office at Mike's place, and in the temporary absence of the bar-keeper I awoke and tampered with the clock. Now Mike had lost his temper a few nights before this, and as a result young Morton did not visit the theatre as freely as of old; still, Mike counted upon his habit and his jealousy to take him as usual past the

place, and believing both of us to be drunk enough to be quarrelsome, he left a little to chance. But if his plans went wrong, so did mine--a little. I wanted to be at hand and to warn Miss Starr before Mike and his men reached the spot, and I counted upon stopping her at her own door, but she did not leave the house; but by some means I miscalculated or misread my watch face, and so when I arrived this is what I found" Standing beside the stout post driven into the ground near the centre of the lot known as the Hawker lot I saw a woman's form, and when I came closer there was the faintest starlight. I found that she was clinging desperately to the post, and a man, much muffled, was wrestling with her. She was panting, and I gloried even then in the pride and grit that kept her from screaming, so long as there was a hope of escape. As I sprang upon the man from behind he uttered a low hissing call for help. I knew this meant that help was close at hand, and instantly jerked my big sombrero from my head and clapped it upon his. The next moment there was a fourth person in the struggle about the post, and I heard Mike's hiss, `Shoot him,' and at the same moment that I whispered to Miss Starr, 'Drop!'"The rest happened in a breath. As I spoke I could see Mike's arm raised high, and threw myself forward to intercept the blow, which I believed was aimed to stun Miss Starr. This brought my head between Mike and the post, and at the height of his elbow, while all three swung about so that Mike, in the sombrero, must have formed the tallest of the group for the moment, and as the butt of his pistol descended upon my head I was dimly conscious of two shots swiftly fired. I reeled against the post,

trying to tell the lady to run, and then I must have staggered in my dazed condition away from them. I remember falling, and that my hand came in contact with a pistol, which, by the touch, I knew to be small. I lay there conscious for a time, but pretended otherwise, for I did not want to tell my story until I was sure Miss Starr had escaped, and I knew that Mike had gone down at the same moment as myself. I was dazed and suffering, and while I lay trying to frame some tale which would not be absurd and would screen Miss Starr, I heard the first sound of an approach, and the next moment I had fainted, I suppose, for I awoke long after in Roxy Higgins' bedroom, and knew that I was hurt--a little."The crowd had listened almost breathlessly, and now a murmur arose when Jack swung his hat high in the air, and called in a tone of command" Silence! I am not yet done! I want you to hear me swear by all that I ever held sacred that Mike Aiken was shot and killed by his own brother, whom you have known as Jerry MacIntyre, and that while MacIntyre was his brother's silent partner, and for a long time conducted the eastern end of the shady business carried on by the large gang of whom Aiken was the head, he was as treacherous toward his brother as he was everywhere and to every one. At the time of this abduction MacIntyre had also planned to undermine his brother, and by feigning to rescue Miss Starr from Mike's clutches to get her into his own, and the proof of this is ready at need--the corroborative proof, I mean, for here stands the man who shot and killed Mike Aiken. Let him deny it if he dare!"And now the voice of the chief was raised, and its tone was biting and full of scorn.You have heard Jack Braddock's story," he began, " and you all know Jack Braddock. I don't believe there's a man among you that doubts what he has just said. You came here, some of you, determined to kill Sergeant Hubert Morton, an innocent man--a man who was not even a witness to the crime of which he is accused. Some of you may be sincere in wanting to avenge the death of Mike Aiken, a man whom I have long known to be a scoundrel, a highway robber, a fence and a debaucher of men and women." For the past week this town has been a hotbed of rascally plots and schemes. Men from the hills, from the mines, from the plains, have hurried here to be in what they hoped would be a grand orgie of evil. In this crowd are the ringleaders who planned the killing and wrought up the hate and fury of a liquor-maddened mob. Some of you are here only because you are reckless and have been plied with drink. Some of you have been made to think that a great wrong has been done, that justice is not for the poor man, and that the law is your enemy. To you, all of you, I say now: Disperse at once. Go to your homes here or elsewhere. Go quickly and go quietly. I have known all your plans, and this jail is a masked battery." To those of you who are from out of town I say I will give you until nine o'clock to-morrow to turn your faces toward your hills, mines, plains, and 'hideouts.' If after that time I find any of your number inside the limits, this town will be placed under martial law, and you will be taken at once. There is some good entertainment in my jail-yard for such as will tarry !"And now for the gang that planned and con-

ducted this raid ! I know you, and I am prepared to deal with you, man by man. If you still want trouble, sing out, and do it quick. You may not all know it, I'm told it's a very select venture, but I am honoured by an invitation to attend a meeting at the other end of town. In fact, my men are already there, and I should be. Sheriff, this way ! I turn this place over to you. Will you see that the streets are clear in half an hour? And if you need help, Captain Ames and his men are here, ready to serve you. And here," he placed some papers in the sheriff's hands, " is a bunch of warrants. If the people go quietly and without further demonstrations, well and good, but at the first outbreak call up your deputies, throw out a cordon of soldiers, and serve every paper at the point of the bayonet, if need be."CHAPTER XXXVII
FACE TO FACESHORTLY after darkness had fallen Roxy Higgins tapped at Sydney Starr's door."The woman has come for ye, miss," she said briskly. "An' there's a man along for escort, the woman says. And if ye please, miss, I'm a-goin' along, at least part way ; and for comp'ny, in case I turn back my niece Maggie has just run in ; she's goin' with me. An' here, miss, is a bit of a note. Mr. Masters tells me to give it ye the minit afore ye start. Oh, it'll be all right, honey ! Just read it whilst I call that silly Maggie."Sydney Starr, who had waited for this summons, cloaked and veiled, opened the note in haste." I know your courage " (she read), " but lest at the last moment you feel a doubt or possibly a dread, I will tell you the truth now, so far as I may. The woman who sends for you is herself a dupe ; she also thinks herself your enemy and rival. She intends to intimidate you for the purpose of blackmail, and through you I hope to be able to render helpless and harmless both her and her accomplice, who is your chief persecutor now. Have no fear ; meet her with perfect courage, for I shall be close at hand, and others, yet more powerful to protect, will be with me; not for a moment will you be alone or in danger. Let Roxy go with you.MASTERS."Twice she read this note, and then turned to Roxy. "I am ready."Ye can go ahead or behind, as ye like," said Roxy to the man and woman who awaited them in the lower hall. " Miss Starr 'll just take my arm, an', Maggie, ye can walk by her other side if ye like. I know the way to the cottage," and she led the way like a grenadier.At the door of the cottage, "Miss Green" produced a key and led the way inside, where she turned upon Roxy and the veiled " Maggie.""There's nobody in the other room except the lady, an' my orders are that Miss Starr shall go in alone. It's quite private--the lady's business."Sydney threw back her veil. " You will wait here, Roxy," she said with dignity. " I have nothing to fear here," and she turned to the woman. "Announce me," she said.The woman pushed the door open. "She has come," she said crustily, and closed the door, shutting in Sydney Starr and the woman Val, face to face at last."You!" It was all Sydney said, and her voice neither rose nor fell."Yes, it is I, and I don't suppose you are very happy to meet me? " the other sneered." I am here," Sydney replied. " As to my feeling where you are concerned, did you send for me to give me a pleasure--the pleasure of your society? I have walked across the town," she added. " I will sit while you tell me the nature of your business with me."" Well, you are a cool one ! My business? Well, I'll tell you a part of it without more ado. Did you know that there was a reward out for you ? "" I think you are mistaken."" Oh, you do ! Then let me tell you, Miss ` Starr,' as you choose to call yourself, that you never deceived me, nor yet my friend, two years ago, with your pretty story of why you didn't want anyone to know you were in New York. We knew you all the time. Why, you poor silly, the whole story was in the papers. Besides, I went to the police, to look at your picture there, the only one they had of you then. They're plentiful enough now." I didn't go to peach on you, only to make sure that you were the woman that the police wanted for killing her lover in a Paris hotel, and that the reward really had been doubled by the friends of the dead man."Yes?" indifferently, "and still you did not denounce me to the police ? I wonder at you!"" Oh, you do! I suppose that you have forgotten how you first came to my flat, back there in New York ? Possibly I might refresh your memory.""Could you, do you think?" Miss Starr settled back in the low chair, and seemed to ponder, but only for an instant. " I have sometimes wondered," she added, "why you inserted that notice in the New York papers : `For sale--A stage wardrobe, new and in splendid condition, designed for a blonde of medium size, and suited to a singing soubrette.' ` Singing soubrette ! ' Ha ! ha ! " and she uttered a soft little laugh. " It was those two words that attracted me. They were new, and sounded really pretty.""You called it something more Frenchy, I suppose," snapped Val." Oui. Quite so, and being in need of the wardrobe of a singing soubrette, I wrote you, and then I called." I remember well my first call at your flat, and our bargain. You were about to go abroad because of the failing health of your sister, and the wardrobe being hers, would not be useful. You were not a singing soubrette."But you--" began Val hotly." But I--I was coming to that. I told you that my taste was all for the stage. I desired to become a--"" Oh, yes ! You were very clever, or so you thought. You told us that you were a young widow who had lately arrived in New York. Your home had been in France. You were not very clever there, but if you had tried to claim to be an American, or English, we should have found you out by your Frenchy ways and words. Oh, yes, you had lived in France, though you did not call yourself French then.""No." The word came from out a bubble of soft laughter. It was evident that, for the moment, Sydney Starr had entered into the spirit of her sport, and, for some reason, was enjoying herself.No," she said again, more soberly, " I don't think I ever called myself a Frenchwoman.""At any rate, you were 'a lady from abroad,' with a little money, and just a few family relics. You had lost your wardrobe by some error of the people who had helped you to make your way to the seaport. And you asked me to go out and buy you what you needed. You were a poor shopper, and you had a very bad head, and walking in the sunlight made it worse. Besides, it was all so strange to you, New York, and you did not know the way. I offered to pilot you about, but you promptly fell ill. Besides, you must learn your songs and your dancing steps. Your steps, when you could give us cards and spades, and out-dance us with one foot ! Well, we went

shopping for you, my friend and I, and you stayed at home, out of sight, with my sister."" Yes," replied Sydney slowly, with a strange, serious intonation. " I am not likely to forget those afternoons when I stayed with--ah, well--let us say, for the present your sister."The woman started, and grew very pale.Suddenly Sydney Starr turned in her chair and seemed to listen." If the person whom you have concealed behind those trunks that I see through the small open space in your closet door is not comfortable, then he--or she--might come out and join us."" There's no one there," snapped Val, and she went over and thrust a hand against the unlatched door, which closed, only to creak open again as before." It does not matter," said Sydney cheerfully. " Ah, were you about to speak ? Because if not--"" I was ! " snapped the brunette. " I think it's my turn! I'll tell a little story now, if you please. When we had bought the coats, and hats, and dresses, and ordered them to be sent home to you, we went into a cafe to lunch and drink a cold bottle to your health and success." While waiting for our birds we began to discuss you, and to guess at the reason for your secrecy and dread of being seen in a city where you were an utter stranger. Of course, we guessed that you were 'lying low,' and had done something pretty bad. And we were right."" Quite right," assented Sydney Starr, and now she sighed again, and her fair face was sad indeed." Oh, you have concluded to admit it at last," she cried." Yes, I admit that.""You may as well, for while we waited, Jerry well, you may as well know it--Jerry took up a paper, and there, in big headlines, were these words: `Wanted for murder. Escape of famous French actress who killed her lover,' etc., etc. You know how it ran, of course."" You mistake," replied Sydney calmly. " I never looked in the newspapers in those days. Why should I?""Well, we did! And there was your description, even to your clothes. It was as plain as day. We decided to keep mum until we got your shopping done. And there was where we made our mistake ! By the time we had seen the offered reward you had given us the slip."Again that low, amused laugh surprised more than one hearer."So that was the reason, and I was not in such deadly danger for those last two nights as we thought. And how we both lay awake, and watched and listened ! And I robbed you of a reward?" She laughed again. "Why, then we stood almost even, and you only had--after I had slipped through your fingers--the case of jewels you stole from me. I say had--possibly you have them still?"But now the shell of the Russian had been pierced, and Sydney had reached the tartar.The brunette's colour had fled from cheeks and lips, and she was swept away upon a hurricane of fear and anger, equally fierce and equally dominant. And out of a whirlwind of words, poured out in the voice of a virago, the climax only was distinct, detached and intelligible."You to talk about jewels ! Jewels that probably you never had ! But this decides it! I was prepared

to befriend you, to help you out of your trouble. Perhaps you don't know that the police of New York are aware that you are here, eh ? "Val stopped and waited for the effect of her words. It was disappointing." Really ! " said Sydney with polite indifference." Such news should interest the police of New York."" Oh, you carry it off well. But you won't escape this time. We have known since you ran away from my home with the help of a fool-sick girl--""Stop! " Sydney Starr was upon her feet and facing the now infuriated Val, standing close and compelling her to meet her eye. "Was it because Rose befriended me and exposed your baseness that you drowned her?"It was a bolt from the blue sky, and she followed it up without a moment's pause. " Oh, I know it all ! When you found that she, out of pity, had aided me, you cozened her with fair words, got her away from the city and took her life. There, stop ! I know it all. She was not your sister. Hush, I say ! Hear what I am able to tell to those who should know of such crimes. When you went out that first day to `shop' for me, the poor thing broke down. She had just learned the truth, and in a most cruel fashion. She had learned that you and the man you call your friend had been in the habit of drugging her to sleep when you wanted a clear field for your wickedness, gambling, fleecing unwary young men by your aid, holding wine orgies. It was through one of these that she learned the truth. You thought that she had been given the usual dose, but lying with closed eyes, she heard your reckless, wicked words. You bade the man carry her to her room, and when there the two of you stood at her window, which commanded the

street, and talked freely, brutally. She had been your companion, your `partner,' in the parlance of the theatres, when her voice and her wit more than offset your beauty ; you had posed as sisters, and all that she had was freely shared with you. She had seen, or so she had been made to believe, her lover, in whom she had fully trusted, drift away from her, leaving her with final farewells to forget her, and go his way with never a word of remembrance. All that was left to her was a little remnant of life and her one friend, yourself. And then she learned that she had been systematically drugged ; that her friend, her partner, is preparing to leave her, abandoned, alone among strangers. Her one possession, a fine new stage wardrobe, the gift of her absent lover, is her all, and she plans to sell it and to seek, with the proceeds of its sale, some humble retreat where she may, perhaps, end her days. And so the advertisement meets my eye, the wheel of fate has turned again, and turned again, and we three, Rosa, yourself and I, are thrown together." Something, affinity, what you will, draws us together, poor Rosa and myself. I see the sadness in her eyes, and it appeals to something in my heart. As much as I am repelled by you, I am drawn toward her. Still, I am only humanly kind, but she is grateful, and so one night, when the drugged wine has been disposed of, and she lies upon a couch apparently sleeping, the plotters grow bold again, feeling quite secure--reveal to her their plans. She has heard them discuss the mystery they are so certain is at the bottom of all my caution, and now she hears them review the story of the French actress who is wanted by the police of two continents. Already they have sold her wardrobe and given the cheque to Rosa, and

the plan she hears is this--" Here Val drops limply down upon the seat just behind her." Presently, on that same night, they mean to rob the new-comer in their midst, who has accepted the shelter they so readily proffered her, for reasons sufficient unto herself. They will drug her when she comes in. They have already searched her luggage by stealth, and have thus discovered her rare jewels." Next day they will possess themselves of the cheque belonging to poor Rosa, and then when she is away, disconnected from them, they will give the clue to the police, and presently be enriched by the big double reward." Then Rosa heard the name of her lover, and listening with beating heart to a heated discussion which well-nigh ended in a quarrel, she learned that the man Mac' had encouraged his friend to go to a new El Dorado, in which he had no faith, and of which Rosa's lover had no knowledge, and all because the man was jealous of the big blonde giant who loved Rosa, and whom, he feared, you were learning to like too well." When the talk ended, the man Mac' was once more confident of his place in your affections, but Rosa, being a woman, knew to a certainty that you loved her lover, that this lover was not false, but had been deluded and deceived, his letters to her destroyed, and hers to him never sent. She learned one other thing that night."" What was that? " asked Val despairingly."It was the address of her lover, and she being quite ill next day, so ill that I volunteered to sit beside her while the shoppers went abroad, I wrote for her a long letter to this lover away in Texas. But

not until I had heard the whole story, and knew the plot against her and myself."Again Sydney paused for a moment, but the woman in the chair never stirred or lifted her eyes." You robbed me that night, stealing from me my one dearly loved and most valued possession, but I was helpless against you then. For more than two years, Val Pierson, you have schemed and plotted with this man whom you call friend, and your reward--where is it ? "Val Pierson sprang up with a fierce cry. Then she cried hoarsely:" My reward will come, some of it, when I see you started back to France, where people die by the guillotine. Now, answer me one question ? "" Ask it. I will judge."" That letter--her letter that you wrote--where is it?"" In the hands of him for whom it was intended--in the hands of Jack Braddock, who knows now the truth, all of it, for I read the story of the finding of that poor girl's body, and I know the truth; and as I know it, I wrote it out, and when I put Rose Kearney's letter into Jack Braddock's hand to-day, I also put the story of her death, and of the treachery of yourself and your friend, Jerry MacIntyre--"Val sprang toward the closet door with an inarticulate curse upon her lips." Curse you ! " she cried wildly, " then he would be here as soon as his feet could carry him, if he were only able. Lucky he's not!"" But he is, and you may expect him, I think."CHAPTER XXXVIII
EXIT SYDNEY STARRVAL's eyes glittered, and her face was bloodless when she put a tiny whistle to her lips, and blew a clear single note." At least," she snarled, " he won't come in time to benefit you. You're my prisoner to-night. To-morrow you will be the State's--Mademoiselle Francine, the murderess ! "" You are again in error. I let you take me for a Frenchwoman for my own ends, but I am not the unhappy French actress whom I chance to resemble, and my crime was not bloodshed. If I am ever arrested, ever a prisoner, there is but one man who will take me alive," smiling a little sad smile." And he, I suppose, is--"" He is my husband ! " She turned swiftly. The door of the supposed closet had been thrust open, and beyond it she caught a glimpse of the night-sky, and knew that what she had mistaken for a closet was in reality a narrow outer entrance, masked by the piled-up trunks, and at the further end of which three men--two Indians, the third a half-breed--had stood, waiting and listening.As they entered, Val Pierson cried hysterically Men, this woman is a criminal! She is your prisoner ! Take her, and--"" Wait, lady! " The half-breed had suddenly found

his tongue. " It is no safe here, now there is fight in town--at jail, at bank there, all over. Come quick, me save ye, hide ye--all. Ugh!" A sound that was not the sound of fighting came in at the open doorway--the sound of men's voices cheering lustily.It startled the woman Val and the two Indians. A quick look passed between them, and then another interruption came.At the sound of the shouting the half-breed had begun to creep nearer to Sydney, gliding along the wall in the rear of the others. He carried something loosely folded across his arm, and his right hand held something in its grasp." Sydney ! honey, look quick!" It was the voice of Roxy Higgins.Roxy and her companion had remained seated as "Miss Green" had placed them, at the side of the kitchen farthest from the door through which Miss Starr had passed, and they had held their places until Val's voice, raised in wrath, had finally brought Roxy to her feet. Then, in spite of a remonstrance from her hostess, Roxy had crossed the room swiftly." Don't ye interfere with me, woman ! " she said, in cold warning. " I know wot's goin' on in here better nor you, maybe. An' I won't be interfered with. That's right, my dear," as the small veiled figure came swiftly to her side. " Stay by Roxy, yer safe enough." And Roxy applied her eye and her attention to the keyhole.It was the sight of the creeping half-breed with the muffling cloak that made her open the door and carried her across the threshold, all in a moment, with her companion close at her side, and, with the cry of warning upon her lips, she had flung herself

half across the room, straight between Sydney and the half-breed, and instantly into his arms and the enfolding blanket, which was muffled about her swiftly and skilfully.And then, for a few moments the two struggling in the centre of the room held the attention of all within it. The half-breed, supposing himself to be struggling with Sydney Starr, stared, while he strove with the bulky figure, which clawed and tore and flung itself and captor from side to side, until suddenly feeling a set of strong teeth piercing the soft Indian blanket, and slowly perforating his left hand, he gave a shrill call for " Pepe ! " accompanied with a round curse, upon which the Deacon broke the spell, and his own owl-like silence, by laughing loudly, as the half-breed swung half around and so came face to face with Sydney Starr.The moment before had been one of tension to all in the room, and now the inmates seemed to awaken all at once to the knowledge that the room was full of people, and that the most of them were smiling.But with the sudden release of Roxy the gleam of humour passed, for Sydney Starr now saw by the side of Roxy a little woman closely veiled, behind these two myself, and behind me the broad shoulders of another.The Deacon became, for the moment, the person in command. Placing a hand upon the arm of the halfbreed, he turned him about with an ease that bespoke muscle, and brought a stare of wonder to the man's

you and Pepe, and look for Mac'. I'll look after the ladies, and the danger may soon be past--for most of us."And now the Deacon addressed himself to the woman Val: " I daresay you understand all this ?" he said quietly, but with firmness. She had been sitting aloof from the others, looking on with angry, uncertain gaze, and she now turned toward him slowly." Precisely; what part are you playing here to-night ? " she asked loftily."Well," he replied, " I was going to say 'stage manager,' but it's not quite that. I reckon the stage manager stands over there," nodding toward me. " You might call me the prompter, and, in that capacity, let me correct your lines. You are under a misapprehension in regard to that lady, who is no more French than you are.""You lie! " Val broke in fiercely. " She is Francine Luvois, with a price upon her head ! "The Deacon bowed. " I won't argue with a lady. So I'll refer you to the `stage manager,"' nodding toward me.It was my cue." He is right," I said with decision, and holding the angry black eye with my own. "This lady is not Francine Luvois. In that you are all wrong. That there is a price, a reward set upon her, is true, however--the price of a man's whole future, the reward his life, if she will--"" It is not true!" Val again began, but I checked her by holding out to her an open letter." Since you are so much interested in Francine Luvois," I said, " I will read this. Listen, ladies and gentlemen:
" ' New York City, June 17, 187--.
" ' MY DEAR MASTERS,--I follow my letter of last night with this brief note, to tell you that I have just received a cable from De Luvier, of the Paris office, in reply to one from me: " Francine Luvois, actress, is no longer wanted here. She died under circumstances so peculiar that the facts have never got beyond our office. It was a case of suicide, and she confessed before notary and priest. She died the 22nd of April last."'"" I daresay you have heard the name of the chief of police of New York," I said, "and will hardly doubt his signature. The fact that Miss Starr, as she has chosen to be called out here, bears a wonderful resemblance to the French actress, has caused some strange mistakes."And now I turned toward the one we had known as Sydney Starr." Madam," I said, " with your permission, I will put an end to this complication. The time has come to silence this woman finally and fully ; she must know the truth."She bowed, but I could see that it was a reluctant consent, and that she doubted the wisdom of my course; but I ignored all this, told the story of her disappearance, told her how rash, how wrong her act had been.While I spoke Sydney had moved closer, her eyes upon my face, and when I had declared the husband's innocence and sincerity, she put out her hands in pathetic, child-like appeal." Is it true ? All of it? Is there no possible mistake ? ""It is true," I answered, "and from that day to

this that forsaken husband has never ceased to search for and long for his lost wife."At this Roxy and Lettice Carolyn unveiled, came silently forward, and I bent and took one of the little quivering hands and lifted it to my lips.I salute the wife of my best and dearest friend," I said " Mrs. Allan Eversoll," and very quietly I drew her hand through my arm and led her across the room to where Allan Eversoll stood, statue like, waiting. "Allan, behold the bravest little wife in all this world," and then I turned swiftly to see Roxy weeping into a big bandanna of blue, and hugging Lettice Carolyn in a manner quite needless and absurd, or so I thought.As for the Deacon, he was pouring information into the ear of Val Pierson with force and terseness, and one could see by her countenance that her views upon several topics were being rapidly modified, if not utterly changed.I had gone to the door by which the half-breed and his pal had entered and opened it ; and standing there I heard hurrying footfalls, a brief pause, and then voices, low and guarded, but coming nearer. They were approaching from the townward side, and I closed the door, and beckoning the Deacon, went toward the kitchen.The next moment the door was flung wide, and in came a throng that caused the woman to cry out." Don't fret, Miss Green," said the first-comer, no other than Pony Jack, while behind him came Phil and Hubert Morton, both in full uniform, the judge, and just inside the doorway Jersey Pete. Evidently he was the leader of the group clustered about the door on the further side, and seeming to form a safe and solid background for " Tom and Jerry," who

stood just within the door, keeping close to Pete, and each with a hand gripping the arm of Jerry Macintyre, who looked ugly and sullen. Evidently his first terror was somewhat abated." It's all right," said Pony Jack. "Mac' here tumbled right into my little trap. An' if you think we're usin' him harsh, just reserve ye're judgment till I read to ye parts of the letter Miss Starr put into my hand a few hours ago.""Jack," it was the judge who had put a restraining hand upon his arm, "you're excusable, but what you are telling these people is not news-to some of them. They want, first, to hear of the outcome of Barry's defence, I take it."" Right," I answered, "and make it brief.""It was brief," the judge smiled grimly at the recollection. "The mob attacked the jail, front and rear, expecting to cope with Barry's baker's dozen whom he swore in yesterday, and who--at least a part of them--""'Bout eight," put in Jersey Pete solemnly."'Bout eight of them, then, failed to turn up at the rendezvous. The mob attacked gaily, but the squad in evidence at the front was suddenly reinforced from the rear." There was suppressed laughter about the outer door, which was repeated from time to time, in spite of Jersey Pete's "Hi-ish, boys!" loudly whispered from behind his hand, as the judge hastily reviewed the story of the attack upon the jail, of Hubert Morton's bold and solitary stand, and of Pony Jack's timely and dramatic arrival with the real criminal in custody, and with his stalwart escort.At first, when Pony Jack began to speak, Allan Eversoll and his recovered wife remained in the deserted sitting-room, but when the judge took up

the tale, and the name of Hubert Morton fell from his lips, the door was slowly opened, a little, then wider, until, seeing the face of her faithful and sad-hearted friend, Mrs. Eversoll came out among us, her face alight, clinging to her husband's arm, but looking earnestly across at young Morton, and eagerly listening when the judge had told how the chief had commanded the crowd to disperse, and how the fierce and bloodthirsty heroes of the bottle and the keg had been careful to dissolve speedily. Sydney Starr, or Mrs. Eversoll, as she should now be called, still clasping Allan's arm, drew him swiftly toward the two Mortons, and putting out her hand to Hubert Morton, and then to his brother, said" Allan, I want you to know two friends of mine, who have been to me, in this awful place, and regardless of my position, not only as courteous as if we had met in a city drawing-room, but as brave and kindly champions, at need, as ever made a woman's cause their own."And Allan Eversoll, while clasping their hands and gladly renewing the friendship of earlier days, won for himself the warm liking of the youth who had been ready to fling away his life for Allan's beautiful new-found wife.CHAPTER XXXIX
JUSTICE METED OUTTHE story of the fiasco at the bank was soon told. When it became certain that the sheriff could handle the crowd, Chief Barry withdrew a number of his deputies, and hurried off in the direction of the bank.In the meantime Pony Jack, anxious about what might be passing at the cottage,. had gathered his staunch supporters, and, with MacIntyre a close prisoner, they set out.Now Chief Barry's first act after the scattering of the mob was to give to Hubert Morton a genial verbal parole, and the two Mortons, with the judge, were prompt to join Jack Braddock's party, only a moment behind the chief, who went in official dignity with " no followers allowed," and the bank and cottage being in the same quarter, they soon fell in respectfully behind the chief's party.The defence of the bank had been carefully prepared by Chief Barry. While the building was old, the safe was comparatively new, and it was presumed that the robbers would apply force.It was a small party that approached the bank, secure in their confidence that only the watchman would be there to oppose them.They found him dozing upon the doorstep outside the building, and were jubilant when they had him safely bound and gagged, too terrified, apparently, in

his sleepy stupor to resist or cry out. They took his keys, and, entering with ease, passed through the front or " main office " hastily, and all unaware that behind the high-railed cashier's desk crouched a group of men, while the back of a newly-placed, cabinet-like receptacle was occupied by yet another "reception committee."The robbers had placed a couple of men outside, but these were secured and silenced by the watchers in ambush at front and rear, and the four men within began at once upon the safe.As the door yielded to their blast, the foremost could dimly see great piles of notes far back, and he reached in hastily, while at sight of the stacked-up wealth, the long arm of his nearest companion reaching in to help him found that it was a double trap, and " loaded for two."The yell that went up from the lungs of this second "catch " gave the signal for action, and the rascals standing guard outside suddenly found the place alive within and without, and were taken to a man, with small chance for resistance.It was over almost before the chief's men could realise it, and the arrival of Pony Jack's party was only of value because of its "fine moral lesson," as Jersey Pete afterwards took pains to state. And so having joined with a will in the rousing cheer that went up, telling those in the other end of the town that all was well, and surprising those at the cottage, Jack and his party hurried on toward the cottage.All within the cottage had listened eagerly to the account of the two raids, and their result ; but I, to whom the outcome was not quite a surprise, kept thinking. I also kept an eye upon the somewhat peculiar movements of Val PiersonI had noted her surprise, and a sudden look of enlightenment, while Sydney Starr's story was being told, and I saw the swift look of joy that crossed her face when Pony Jack entered the kitchen, and its change to apprehension when MacIntyre was led in between his two custodians.She had seen them both from her place in the further room, and at sight of Jack Braddock she had started toward the kitchen. But the Deacon had put out a restraining hand."You may as well know that you are in my charge for the present," he said shortly.It was because of this restraint that she had not been seen or observed by Pony Jack, and that Mac', who was clearly peering about in search of her, had not seen her.Now, as the recital of the judge and the shorter stories of the others came to an end, there was a momentary halt in the proceedings, filled in by a buzz of queries and exclamations.How eager they were to know all! How genuine their joy, how hearty their congratulations, when a few words from me enlightened them.At that moment I heard a high and strident voice at the outer door demanding instant admittance. It was Dan Drayton. By his side stood Roxy's Chinese cook with a lantern, by which I knew Dan had missed his "paroled prisoner," as he considered her, and had bribed the celestial to conduct him to the cottage, in disobedience to Roxy's strict orders."It's your captor," I said, in the ear of Lettice Carolyn, and with a look of mischief in her eyes, she replied,"Why don't you let him arrest me?" by which I knew that she bore officer Dan a bit of a grudge.Nodding to Jersey Pete, I said, very politely:Please admit officer Drayton," whereupon he was allowed to enter, and at once demanded of me the centre of the stage, the opportunity to arrest " Miss Sydney Starr," and an explanation. To which I replied:" It's all right, officer. I am just about to finish my work here by explaining to these good people the reasons for what has come to pass, some of it here. When I am done, you shall serve your warrant, and, if need be, with my assistance." I was willing to let him down easy, after all that had passed, but he would not have it so. Drawing himself up pompously, he said:" What I have to do will occupy a moment, sir." He drew a big folded paper from his pocket, and placing his hand upon the arm of Mrs. Carolyn, said " Francine Luvois, alias Sydney Starr, I arrest you in the name of the law," and then he read his awful "legal document," and preferred his awful charge.I allowed the profound consternation that pervaded the room to last a few seconds, just long enough to give Dan Drayton of New York a chance to enjoy his own importance thoroughly. Then I drew a certain letter from my pocket, and said aloud" In this letter the New York Chief of Police informs me that Francine Luvois is dead."Then I held the letter before Dan Drayton's bewildered face, and at the sight of the signature the roaring lion became a sickly donkey, turning a glance of mingled despair and hatred at me, and then disappeared in the crowd.The Subject of Francine Luvois having been broached, and because I saw so much wonder and amazement in the eyes of the people, I gave them a rapid account of what I knew. I told how the Eversolls had been annoyed at Paris by the staring and audacious addresses of young and old Frenchmen, who mistook Mrs. Eversoll for a French actress, just then the popular idol. I told why Mrs. Eversoll left her husband, and how she came to know "Valetta Pierson," the veiled woman. I told that Val had fallen in love with Jack R. Braddock, and had forged a letter from him to herself, in which he declared that he cared no more for Rose Kearney, her "sister," but loved her, Val, alone ; that Rose Kearney had been stung to death by this letter, but had finally discovered that Val was deceiving her, ruining her, killing her, and in her desperation had opened a letter directed to Val, and written by Jack R. Braddock.From this letter Rose learned that Jack had been led to believe that she was faithless to him, and had disappeared. At this Rose wrote two long letters to Jack and began to hope again, but Val and Mac' were ready then to betray " Francine " to the police, and took her jewels, and "Francine" had to flee, leaving the poor, unhappy Rose in the clutches of the murderous pair.I had glanced at Val at times during my hurried narration. She had been straining her eyes out when Jack appeared on the scene; she had looked defiance at me when I first mentioned her name, but gradually her lips parted in ghastly fear, and her cheeks flushed hotly and blanched in turn." Both of them are present here," I continued ; "the woman is standing there, guilty, I firmly be-

lieve, in intent, if not in fact, of the death by drowning of Rose Kearney, together with the man who so ably assisted her to spend Mrs. Eversoll's money and to steal her jewels ; the man who, not long ago, plotted with his brother to kidnap `Miss Starr,' determined to reap the profit alone. Whether the killing of his villainous brother was also planned, I do not know, but there stands the witness who can testify that he did kill Mike Aiken, so called. And now I think my work is done," and I turned and proffered my arm to Lettice Carolyn.But Pony Jack sprang to the centre of the little room, a bit of paper in his uplifted hand."One word more," he cried, and his voice rang stern and full of menace. " It is fit that I speak the last word, and tell the last of my poor girl's story. The first two letters you have heard about never reached me until to-day, when this lady put them into my hand. And this is why, when I read of this letter, and saw it corroborated in the newspapers, I made no sign. I thought--God forgive me, and curse them that framed the lie--I thought she had deserted me, and all her friends, for another man, and in this belief I received this letter," and he began to read:" Jack, Val has just read me your loving letter to her, and now I know why you went away, and why you stay. You love her, and only pity me! I pity myself! I have a pretty skirt, fur-trimmed and swell, and a coat that you would like, I know. They were given me by another poor, unhappy girl who has no friends here; and so if I am picked up off the railway crossing, or fished out of the river wearing these, no one will be harmed, and you will no longer need to pity me. Good-bye, Jack ! I don't want your pity." ROSE."His voice grew harsh before the end, and at the last word he let the hand holding the letter drop at his side, then he turned to me." Mr. Masters," he said, " these ladies must not stay here. I and my friends will relieve you from any further responsibility. You have said truly--your work is done!"" You mistake! " I said. " That man," pointing to Jerry MacIntyre, " is a road agent, and my prisoner."As our eyes met, I felt a hand upon my arm. It was the Deacon, who said:" Let me be your deputy."I glanced about the room, met the eye of Jack Braddock once more, and turned toward Roxy." Call your Chinaman to carry the lanterns," I said ; and then to Allan, " Come ! " I drew Lettice Carolyn's hand closer to my side, and held it there unchidden ; and as we passed out, I glanced back and saw that officer Dan was following us. " That's good of you, Dan," I said, as we gained the outer air. " Give your arm to Mrs. Higgins, and come along." Dan "stood Pat," but when he presented his crooked arm, Roxy relieved her tense feelings with a rich Irish laugh." Go 'long wid ye ! " she said good-humouredly. " The honner of walkin' alongside ye's all I kin stan', at my toime o' life ! " and she hurried him on ahead, while Lettice and I fell behind, and let Allan and his wife go slowly on, forgetful of all save themselves and their happiness.It was the Deacon, as I still call him, who told me what happened after we left the cottage. I had instructed him fully, where the woman Val was concerned, and when I left the place I washed my hands of her, as well as of the man we only knew as Jerry

MacIntyre. It was in the small hours, before the grey of dawn, that the Deacon came to me at Roxy's."It's over," said the Deacon, "and it's off your hands for good ! " He had drawn me aside, and after a few words I called Allan, and we left the ladies about Roxy's tea-table, Lettice and her new-found sister having much to say to each other; while Roxy, whose presence they insisted upon, beamed and listened, and was a proud and happy woman." You must not leave me now, Roxy dear," Starr Eversoll insisted, when the good soul would have left them. "You have been my support and stay through too much to be shut out now from my happiness ! And, remember, my dear friend, one part of our plan, made days ago, is to be carried out still. You are to go with me wherever I go, and my home is always to be yours. It's a bargain ! It's all settled ! " And for the first time our little aristocrat, who had accepted her endearments, but had been too unhappy to bestow in kind, took Roxy's rough head in her two arms, and kissed her on cheek, and nose and chin-a kiss of perfect trust, warm love, and assured equality."Where is Mac'? " I asked of the Deacon." Back there--at the cottage. It was like this. You remember the last speech of Pony's, before he pulled up and waited for your exit. Well, I s'pose none of us realised how much we all were bottling up, as it were, because of the ladies ; and before your backs were fairly turned, there was a change in that crowd. The men outside crowded into the kitchen instanter, and this pushed Tom, Jerry, and the man between them forward and close to Jack Braddock. He had dropped his eyes as you left the room, and he kept them upon that poor girl's last letter, which

he was folding carefully, and slowly putting away in his pocket. But suddenly he looked up and straight into that poor devil's face, and the look in his eyes made us all sit up a bit."'Friends,' he began, `there was a turn-out to-night for the purpose of disposin' of the man that killed Mike Aiken. Maybe some of that crowd are here now ? '"' We're all here, jack!' said someone, 'an' we're all with ye. Go ahead!'" ' Thank'ee,' said jack. I And now I want yer judgment. Look at that man!' he nodded towards MacIntyre. ' He killed his brother ! To that I can swear. And I'm free to say that fer that act I wouldn't hang the worst man in Wyoming ! For Mike Aiken was a bad man--a cruel, heartless tormentor, and a robber of women.When some folk begun to suspect him of havin' a finger in the stage and mail robbin', I was sort of turned loose to see what I could find out, an' to make me solid with such cattle as Mike it was let out that I was once on a time a deserter from the regulars, and--because we had to be very cautious--only three officers knew that it wasn't true. Well, Mike cottoned to me on that account, and then he tried his little bluff on me. Enough of that ! If this man had done no worse than to attempt to do me, and to shoot a bad brother, I'd call it a family affair, an' let it go. But, men, he has done worse ! an' it's me and mine that he's wronged and murdered !' He drew a long revolver from his belt. `Fellows, I ask ye to turn that man loose. If ye will, I'll give him just one chance for his life ; if ye won't--' the weapon in his hand clicked, and suddenly Tom and Jerry were

standing as before, but both men with arms crossed high upon the breast." ' I've been sick o' my job fer a long time, anyhow!' said Tom, with an oath ; 'an' I'm blest if I'll guard sech cattle any longer!' And Jerry says, ` Same here P An' then Jack's voice was raised again." ' Understand, friends, this man is a thief, a burglar, a despoiler of women. He has robbed your mails. He has cheated you at cards. He has blackmailed women. And to-night, if he had succeeded, he would have abducted our Sydney Starr, for whom all of us would fight at need. And as if this were not enough, knowing Hubert Morton to be innocent, and himself guilty, he was the head of the plot to lynch that young feller to-night. For decency's sake, somebody give the quaking wretch a pistol, and let him go outside ! '" ' Here, Mac'!' Suddenly, before a hand could be lifted, the woman Val had rushed forward between the two men and thrust a pistol into the hands of MacIntyre. And as suddenly the half-crazed wretch had raised it, and fired point-blank at Jack Braddock." No one knew just how it was. The woman had loved Jack desperately, and she may have seen Mac's purpose, or repented her act, as women do, too late. At any rate, at the instant when we saw the pistol levelled straight at Jack--she being nearest of any by several paces, for there had been a sudden drawing back, at the moment when Tom and Terry dropped their hands and drew away from their prisoner-and then there was a flash and a sudden dart, both together ; the woman fell without a sound. Mac' flung down the pistol and turned to run, but the yard was full of people, and somehow every man seemed

to know what had happened. In a minute Jack, myself, and the Green woman stood alone about the woman on the floor. She was not dead, and I found one of the regulars on his horse in the road. Just arrived,' he said, ' wantin' to see it all.' He rode off to hunt up doc'. It wasn't long before the old fellow came--he was looking after some of those hurt at the bank, and they stopped him just outside the cottage gate," and the Deacon paused." Yes ! Finish, man ! ""Well--oh, hang it, I didn't use to be soft-hearted, and the man deserved it! They took Mac' out to the road, made him confess to the truth of all you and Jack had said, and then they hung him to a beam of the old barn frame begun on the Green woman's place, and never finished.""And Val--the woman?"" Will die, doc' thinks. Perforated lung." And--Jack ? "Never left the room where the woman lay till the doctor came. He wanted to find out something--ask some questions about Rose. They were taking down the body when he came out into the crowd, and as he stood lookin' down at it, someone says : 'Jack, you warn't in it after all.'" ' No,' said he; ' I asked to give him a chance, and then to shoot him. Ye may not believe it, boys, but I've never took hand in a lynchin' yet. I've shot a feller in his boots ; but--hangin', it ain't to my taste, somehow. Though I guess it about fitted him.'"" Faugh ! " said Jack Braddock, who lay upon the couch in the dining-room, with Roxy coddling him, for he was still somewhat weak. "The man was a coward clean through. I told Tom and Jerry to

take him out of my sight, lest I kill him before we were done with the dog. When I think of that poor girl--" and broken and unnerved with the long strain, the big, tender-hearted fellow buried his head in the sofa pillows, and his shoulders heaved with the sobs that choked his utterance. He left us as soon as he could master his emotion, and when we next met he was the Jack of old, only graver and older. The name of the girl he had loved never crossed his lips again.When we were alone together--Allan, his wife, Lettice, and I--I restored the jewels taken from MacIntyre, and told them the story connected with them ; and how, through the tiny note wrapped about them, and the scrap of Starr's handwriting given me by Lettice, I had traced their ownership. I also told of the handkerchief dropped by Miss Green from Val Pierson's coat, and bearing Starr's initials." How strange it all is, and has been," murmured Starr, weary, but the picture of content." It was, indeed, and most perplexing ; when I had just begun to fancy that you might possibly be Allan's lost wife, then came the talk in Box 10, and Morton's positive declaration. I changed my opinions again and again until at last I had no opinion.""And you gave me no hint of it at all," grumbled Allan." I dared not ; there was too much doubt up to the hour when I opened that letter.""I was foolish," declared Starr. "Foolish and proud--too proud to be wise!"CHAPTER XL
HAPPY TIMES" MR. MASTERS," said Allan Eversoll's wife from her place upon Roxy's red plush parlour sofa, where she sat beside her husband, her hand thrust beneath his arm, " we have had so much to talk of, Allan and I, that I had almost forgotten that I wanted my curiosity gratified upon several points."We were seated in Roxy's parlour, Allan and his wife, Lettice Carolyn, and myself. It was one o'clock of the day following the attack upon the bank and jail; and on the following morning we were to go, not east, but west. The Eversolls, because it seemed best for Allan ; Lettice, because she loved the California coast ; and I, because I--loved Lettice, and did not choose to lose my ground ; and again, because Allan would have it so.Upon our return, Roxy, who remained to sell her property, was to join us." I don't know what kind of a figure I'll cut," she declared, " in a fine city home, though I can look after the housekeeper, and make the maids stip out and do no shirkin'; an' my dear Sydney--Mrs. Eversoll, beggin' her pardon, has said she'd let me be her housekeeper, since I couldn't live idle, not me ! As for livin' in the big city, I'm free to confess--now--that it's what I've always longed to do.""And what," I asked, "do you wish explained, Mrs. Eversoll ? "" First, how you began to suspect me--and when?" she replied." To begin, I had seen your picture--and you had been described to me, quite fully. When I saw you at Mike's you puzzled me, for I saw at once that you were quite out of your element, and had received a thorough social training, or else were a most uncommon actress. But it was not until I saw you in a riding-habit at the fort and engaged in pistol practice, that I began to be seriously puzzled, for then, all at once, I saw the resemblance to the picture Mrs. Carolyn had shown me in Santa Barbara. Still, I could not reconcile your position with yourself, at first; but, later, recalling your aunt's characterisation of you, I began to wonder and to think it might be yourself, even here in Cheyenne.""Then you did not believe her dead? " broke in Allan." Not wholly. To a detective the fact of the finding of clothing identified as hers would not be taken as proof positive that they had been found upon her body, and the more I pondered upon this, in the light of what I knew of Mrs. Eversoll, the more probable it seemed that she would be the very one to adopt this method of putting searchers off the scent, and the more unlikely that she would keep, or wear, garments that might be recognised. And above all, I could not believe that the woman who had been described to me would either put herself in the way of the assassin or commit suicide.""Thank you!" It was Allan's wife who spoke, gravely, sweetly. And then a sudden gleam of humour lighted up her face. "And what had you

imagined that I might or would do ? " she questioned." I am proud to say that I hit upon something like the truth, for I was certain that, if living, you were somewhere among strangers, fighting your way single-handed."" Thank you," she murmured, and her eyes fell. " And--about this--this Francine Luvois ? "" I had read of the case, naturally, at the time it occurred, and doubtless had seen her pictures, widely circulated among the police as they were sure to be ; and when I overheard your talk with Lieutenant Morton in Box No. 10, I began to doubt and to feel uncertain. The lieutenant was very positive. He was ready to swear that yours was the face he had seen in Paris. Then I sent to Mrs. Carolyn for your picture. Of course, the possibility of a close resemblance was in my mind, but I confess that the extreme probability that an actress might think to continue safely in her profession in so remote and uncouth a place, and under a changed name, and the equal improbability of finding a lady of society, all unused to the life, in such a place, weighed down the scale in favour of Francine Luvois, but always with a haunting doubt. Then came Mike's death, and your peril. And the doubt, the fear that you might be yourself, made me more zealous on your behalf. And when finally, I learned that a New York private detective was en route to arrest Francine Luvois, I knew it was time to act, and--I opened and read your letter ! "" My confession ? ""Your confession, if you will. And then I telegraphed to Allan to come without fail. I think you know the rest. And now, may I ask a question ? "" As many as you will," she said." This man MacIntyre, did you not recognise him on the day you first came to the table at the Lindholm ? "" I did, and almost fled in a panic."" You concealed the panic well."" I had to ! And then I began to realise that he had as much to fear as I--more, for he did not know my identity. Of course, that he believed me to be the French Francine I could not guess. But I was on the alert after that first meeting, if you can call it such--and avoided him."" And he you ? "" Ah ! well, I was prepared to defy and denounce him. I knew him first by his scarred and ugly hand."" And the woman, Val ? "When she stood beside my horse that day at the races, I saw what seemed a familiar form ; she has a fine figure, you know. And when I discovered the cut bridle I was sure it was her work. Mr. Masters, is there any doubt about the--the--shooting--that night ? "" Not the slightest ! The balls that killed Aiken came from MacIntyre's weapons, while Jack Braddock's wound was given by Mike.""And that wound ? Was it really serious--at first ? "" It was serious, but never dangerous. And it healed rapidly. Braddock's a strong fellow and tough. He kept playing his part because he felt that to speak until the critical moment--to speak too soon--would be to give Hubert Morton's enemies--and yours--time to concoct new schemes, to bribe new witnesses. Roxy and the doctor were in the secret, and in sympathy."While we sat reviewing the strange combination of events just past, Roxy ushered in the two Mortons, who met with a cordial welcome.Hubert Morton, in spite of his boyish and reckless folly, was at bottom a reasonable human being, and his nature was morally sane and sweet. When he knew that the woman he had worshipped was the wife of another, and that other so worthy, so true and long-suffering, he seemed to awaken as from a sweet dream." I could not meet her, knowing her free, and not for me," he said to his brother. " But I have always despised the man who sighs and dangles after another man's wife. Yesterday I would rather have died than endure the pain of another meeting. To-day I know her for a wife--a happy wife--and her sad story makes me long still to be her friend. Take me with you, old man ; I want to tell her so, and I want to know him better !And as we journeyed westward, there occurred yet another event to strengthen my friendship with Allan and his wife. I had kept a check upon my tongue for many months, but at last I burted out to Lettice that I loved her; and Lettice--well, when we returned to Cheyenne to fetch Roxy, it was as man and wife.And now never a year passes without the Eversolls and ourselves giving a " Cheyenne " party, which brings to our doors the Mortons, now inseparable companions, the judge, Chief Barry, and last, but by no means least, Pony Jack.THE END