The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood, an
	    electronic editionDiego Ortunez de CalahorraMargaret TylerRekeyed and edited by Irene MiddletonThe Lewis H. Beck Center1000KbThe Lewis H. Beck CenterEmory UniversityAtlanta, Georgia© 2008 Emory University. Permission is granted to download, transmit, or otherwise reproduce, distribute or display the contributions to the work claimed by Emory University for non-profit educational purposes, provided this header is included in its entirety.  For inquiries about commercial uses, contact either: Women Writers Resource Project or Lewis H. Beck Center for Electronic collections and services, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322.2008Emory Women Writers Resource ProjectOrtunez de Calahorra, Diego and Margaret Tyler. The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood. London, Printed by Thomas East, c. 1579.This text is produced in conjunction with the Women Writers Resource Project at Emory University.Library of Congress Subject HeadingsEarly Modern through the 18th CenturyEnglishCaucasianUneditedProseGreat Britain1500-1599English literature--Early modern, 1500-1700.Women--England--History--Renaissance, 1450-1600--Sources.Women--England--History--17th century--Sources.English literature--Women authors.2008Irene MiddletonWoodruff FellowRekeyed, proof-read, and encoded with XML tags inserted in compliance with TEI guidelines using TEILITE.Introduction to The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and KnighthoodMiddleton, Irene2008The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and KnighthoodThis edition of The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood is included in the Emory Women Writers Resource Project for its translator, Margaret Tyler, and its claim to be the first romance to be published in England.  This is the only searchable full text edition available and the only available in a Roman font.  There is an excellent facsimile edition available of Tyler's part of this multi-volume romance, but the images of the first edition housed in the Early English Books Online (EEBO) collection are sadly incomplete (missing up to 20% of the work).1The print facsimile copy is Volume 8: Margaret Tyler.  Ed. Kathryn Coed.  The Early Modern Englishwoman: A Facsimile Library of Essential Works.  Part 1: Printed Writings, 1500-1640.  Aldershot: Scolar Press, 1996.  The EEBO edition can be found here. It is hoped that by having a free original spelling edition in Roman print available, the work may receive more scholarly attention and be used in teaching early modern literature.  The English translation of The Mirrour runs to eight volumes strewn over many years and several translators and publishers.  Margaret Tyler's part, initially titled The Mirrour of Princely Deeds and Knighthood and republished as The First Part of the Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood, translates only the first part of the first book of the Spanish original.  The Spanish Espejo de príncipes y cavalleros (often called El Cavallero or El Caballero del Febo after its main character or Espejo de principes y caballeros) was written by Diego Ortúñez de Calahorra (the series was continued by Pedro de la Sierra and Marcos Martínez).  The inclusion of only the first volume need not deter scholars, teachers, or students.  Spanish Golden Age readers "apparently did not share the modern tendency to look at books such as these primarily as members of their respective 'families'; it was difficult, if not impossible, for a reader of the time to assemble most of the books of any 'family,' for which reason these books were more often read and discussed as individual works" (Daniel Eisenberg Romances 39).Margaret TylerTwelve years ago, Kathryn Coad summed up what was known about Margaret Tyler in two pages and what had been written about her work in twelve bibliographic entries.  Since then, little has changed.  Repressing the Amazon, "Translation as Collaborative Authorship: Margaret Tyler's The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood," and "A History of the Precedent: Rhetorics of Legitimation in Women's Writing" are the only additional publications to appear in the MLA Bibliography, the first primarily about Edmund Spenser's The Faerie Queene and the second addressing only Tyler's "Epistle to the Reader."  Several collections of primary sources, especially those focusing on women's writing, have included "To the Reader" and many books on early modern English women's writing analyze it.2See Female & Male Voices in Early Modern England: An Anthology of Renaissance Writing edited by Betty Travitsky and Anne Lake Prescott (2000) and The English Renaissance: An Anthology of Sources and Documents edited by Kate Aughterson (1998) as examples.Little is known about the translator, whose sex would even be unknown—she is listed only as "M.T." on the title page—save for her signed dedication.  That dedication to "Lord Thomas Haward" [Howard] mentions her previously being a servant to this family and Moira Ferguson suggests that she may have been Margaret Tyrrell, a relative to the Howards (51).  Ferguson argues that Tyler's knowledge of Spanish and her service in the house of Thomas Howard, Fourth Duke of Norfolk, suggest that she is Catholic, but Louise Schleiner provides compelling arguments on both sides of the question.3Note: Moira Ferguson's error in identifying the family Tyler served for as that of the Third Duke of Norfolk (51) has been repeated by others (e.g. Tina Krontiris (153n18)), but all agree that she served for the Duke who was executed in 1572.  Spanish "was a useful commercial language for families in international trade" and the families of "diplomats' servants and followers who had lived abroad might have "picked up a language conversationally" or may have been learned intentionally to read smuggled Catholic texts (Schleiner 4).  Although Tyler's service would have been to Howard's Protestant second wife, the mother of the Thomas Howard of the dedication, the house was friendly to Catholics (as the Fourth Duke of Norfolk's first, third, and intended fourth were) (Schleiner 2).4Schleiner's article "Margaret Tyler, Translator and Waiting Woman" also collects an array of evidence of possible relation to Tyler; those wanting additional possible biographical details of her life will find it interesting.  Tyler provides one other biographical detail--references to her "aged years" ("To the Reader" [iv-v]).Tyler's choice to dedicate the work to a young man follows Spanish tradition and links her work to a significant piece of early modern history (Eisenberg Romances 93-94 n8).  The Howard family had long been one of the most powerful in England.  Blamed for encouraging Henry VIII into his failed marriage with Catherine Howard, the third Duke of Norfolk (also a Thomas Howard) was imprisoned on charges of treason, while his son, Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, was beheaded for the same.  The fourth Duke of Norfolk, the father of the Thomas Howard that Tyler dedicates her book to, was also beheaded, for his involvement in the Ridolfi Plot to put Mary Queen of Scots on the throne in 1572.  It seems likely that the "Lord Thomas Haward" of Tyler's dedication is the fourth Duke of Norfolk's son by his marriage to Margaret Audley, as he is the next Thomas in direct descent of the Howard line, later to become the first Earl of Suffolk.5See the "Norfolk" entry in The Complete Peerage vol. IX, especially pages 610-26.  Born in 1561, Thomas fits Tyler's claim that both his parents are dead (the Duke of Norfolk in 1572 and Audley in 1563) and he is the right age to be a "noble youth" (though already a widower by the book's publication). Tyler's dedication links her work, framed as a lesson in virtue, to a family in a questionable position.  Yet Tyler praises the Howard line:In the meane time this my trauaile I cōmend vnto your Lordshippe, beseechhing the same, so to accept thereoff, as a simple testimony of that good will which I bere to your parēts while they liued thē being their seruāt, & now do owe vnto their ofspring after their decease, for their demerits. Vnder your honours protectiō I shal lesse fere the assalt of the enuious, & of your honours good acceptaciō I haue some hope in the mildenes of your Lordships nature, not doubting but that as your Lordshippe hath giuen no smal signification in this your noble youth of wisedome and courage to so many as knowe you, it being the only support of your auncestours lyne: so the same lykewise will maynteine your auncestours glorye & the hope of your owne vertues with affabilitie & gentlenesse, which was the proper commēdation of your parents.The only hint of scandal is the suggestion, made unclear by the syntax, that "their decease" was somehow related to "their demerits" ("parents" is the only plural noun in the sentence, so is grammatically the referent).  Tyler's choice of dedication is conventional the Howards are a high-ranking connection but it is also a surprising choice, given the family's recent fall from favor.  It is paradoxical for a woman, for whom the act of publishing already created the potential for scandal, to increase rather than diminish her risk by her choice of dedicatee.  Rather than claiming a patron's protection, Tyler may have brought more disrepute to her work.  This unusual choice may signal her desperation.  An older woman who turned to translation and needed to renew ties with the family she was formerly employed by suggests that she was not currently in service to another, less ill-favored family to whom she could have dedicated the work.The Mirrour's ContextTyler's work has received some critical attention as the first extant chivalric romance in English.  This anachronistic label may obscure, however, its connections to already developed genres that an early modern English reader might have associated it with.  In the years surrounding The Mirrour's publication, its printer Thomas East also produced editions of the verse history of Sir Bevis (1585) and of Sir Thomas Malory's Morte d'Arthur (1582).  Although these editions post-date The Mirrour, these stories were in popular circulation well before it.  This is quite at odds with the Spanish perception of libros de caballerias: "Golden Age readers had a clear and consistent concept of which works were, and which were not, romances of chivalry," excising them from similar but distinct histories or translations of chivalric stories (Eisenberg Romances 4-7).  The Mirrour's mix of fictional and "historical" elements fits Eisenberg's definition—"A romance of chivalry is a long prose narration which deals with the deeds of a 'caballero aventurero o andante'—that is, a fictitious biography"—but so do many of the King Arthur narratives (7Romances italics added).  Tyler's work, however, because it is limited to the first part of the first book of the original, bears little resemblance to early modern English biography.  While the later volumes would come to be known by the character's name, the Knight of the Sun, this volume deals equally with the Knight of the Sun (Donzel del Febo), his brother Rosicleer, and their parents.  In its English context, The Mirrour has a closer relationship to the "histories" of Arthur and Sir Bevis that East published alongside than to modern conceptions of biography.  Early modern readers might have grouped The Mirrour with other historical-biographical works like Plutarch's Lives or Foxe's Book of Martyrs.  These all presume that reading about virtuous and moral lives inspired such behavior in the reader.6Eisenberg notes a similar connection between Spanish romances and chivalric histories and states that "The current distinction made between these ‘historical' works and the ‘fictional' romances of chivalry, all of which declared themselves to be purely historical works, was certainly seen vaguely by most contemporary readers, some of whom probably did not see it at all" (Romances 39-40).  Generic references in The Mirrour are to this kind of "history" in Tyler's prefatory material used to refer to the narrative and in the narrative used to refer to the fictional source text.  Though all of these genres were developing, of all the early modern genres, history seems to have the closest connections to The Mirrour.Although the genre of chivalric romance was not yet cohesive, Tyler's involvement with The Mirrour defied conventions.  Tyler's choice to print a secular prose work is unusual both of its form and its content.  Early modern English culture discouraged women writing; women who did write most often choose options that were considered appropriate shorter works in manuscript and usually religious texts.7Tyler's "To the Reader" acknowledges that her choices are unusual and could be considered improper.  Tyler did follow convention in translating a text, rather than authoring a new work.  But in hindsight, it is especially unusual for a woman to have translated this work.  Spanish materials were rare in England (Tina Krontiris 20) because of the ongoing tensions between Spain and England and most romance translations would come from intermediary French editions (Coad xi).  The association of reading Spanish with closet Catholicism also adds an element of risk.  As with her dedication, Tyler presents a veneer of propriety with atypical, even potentially subversive, elements.  Tyler was not only the first English woman to publish a romance, she is the only English woman to do so until Mary Wroth's Urania (a pastoral rather than chivalric romance, first published in 1621) (Helen Hackett 57-62).  The cultural norms surrounding similar works seem to have guided other women away from the field.Tyler may have played a role in the conception of this genre's authorship as properly male, as her "Epistle to the Readers" presents an argument for why her work should be considered proper.  She presumes that it would be seen as untoward, presumes that because of its content and because it is a long, secular prose narrative, it would be considered a properly male domain.  As Tyler confirms, women "may honestly employ her trauaile" in "penning matters of great weight and sadnesse in diuinitie or other studies . . . other some discoursing of matters more easy & ordinary in common talke" rather than the "matter more manlike" of romance ([iv]).  But Tyler's prefatory material presents a compelling argument for the propriety of women writing, and it is this which has received most of the book's recent critical attention.8See for example works by Catherine Gallagher, Kathryn Coad, and Louise Schleiner and its inclusion in various women's writing anthologies and Brown University's Women Writers Project.  Tyler begins with a conservative argument, deflecting blame by minimizing her role.  She claims she undertook the translation only on the urging of her friends and that "The inuention, dispositiō timming, & what els in this story, is wholy an other mans, my part none there in but the translation" ([iv]).  Tyler's disavowal of a creative role for translation parallels the original Spanish authors of romances: "the romances of chivalry were the least 'literary' type of literature being written at that time.  There was a unanimous pretense that the words were true histories, only rescued from oblivion and modernized by a sixteenth-century contemporary" (Eisenberg Romances 43).  Yet, as Eisenberg points out, this encourages anonymous publishing (Romances 43); Tyler so prominently attaching her name to her work breaks with yet another expectation.  While the genre in Spain was perceived as having "no classical model, no pedigree or tradition, and thus very little prestige," the fact that it is a translation adds some status and propriety to the English edition and shifts any blame for inappropriate content to Ortúñez de Calahorra (Romances 9).  Tyler, while claiming the benefits of translation—that this is not her work—also claims that this is actually a better topic for women's translation.  This work is merely an "exercise," a term reminiscent of schoolboys' lessons, "a matter of more héede then of déep inuention or exquisite learning" ([v]).  Tyler frames this lighter matter as more appropriate for the supposedly limited female abilities: "I [do not] trust mine own iudgement sufficiently, if matter of controuersy were handled" ([vi]).  The low status Tyler claims for The Mirrour also follows the Spanish example—"there was little about the romances to attract an author who wished to win praise for his literary abilities, and the romances remained in the hands of another class of writers, not incompetent at their task, perhaps, but spiritually far from the intelligentsia of the day" (Eisenberg Romances 44).Tyler continues her argument by addressing what women may read, claiming that any work dedicated to a woman should be proper reading for her, since a woman needed to know what her name was being associated with.  Dedicating a work to a woman, she claims, is the same as female translation or authorship; what is important is that a woman's name is associated with a text.  If men are allowed to include a woman's name as a kind of guarantee of the book's quality, so then a woman might append her name to a book for what Tyler argues is similar purpose.9Gallagher in "A History of the Precedent" follows a similar line about Tyler's argument to conclude that Tyler "considers both instances of female authorship" (314).  I am unconvinced that Tyler presents both of these as authorship, but she certainly equates the degree of potential scandal and indicates that women bear responsibility for both books dedicated to them and books they author/translate.  Gallagher argues that both dedication and translation can be considered "authorship" as both fulfill "the authorial function as the authorizer" (italics original, 314).  Tyler presumes that a woman associating her name to a text is the vital point, regardless of her role, as it is that association which could bring scandal.  Who connects the text and name—male author and female dedicatee or female translator—is irrelevant; the risk and degree of (im)propriety is equal.  It is therefore "all one for a woman to pen a story, as for a man to addresse his story to a woman" ([vi]).Tyler's argument is bolstered by her particularly active definition of reading, which slips easily into an argument for women writing.  She claims that women may "further wade" in texts in "search of a truth"; as Catherine Gallagher interprets, "Once in the book [… the female reader is] an active prober of its submerged contents.  She has become, like the author, a seeker of the book's truth.  Moreover, once she grasps the truth it becomes hers, and she is, therefore, entitled to "deale" in it by translation and publication" (312).  This intimate relationship between the reader and the text is related the early modern fear of the influence of texts (or their performance in the theatre) and will be addressed further in the section on the book's audience and romances' reception more generally.  As Gallagher demonstrates, Tyler argues that there is little difference between reading and writing a text (312): any text dedicated to a woman is appropriate reading material for her; part of reading is "mastering" the material, making it ones own; if one already owns the material, then why may one not write about it?  But Tyler does phrase the argument as I did—with a question.  She does not force her readers to agree with her, but rather suggests.Tyler's language and her argument for women writers belie her disavowal of a creative role in The Mirrour.  Her word use suggests she considers herself a co-author, rather than the less-involved role she describes.  According to Brown University's Women Writers Online version of Tyler's "To the Reader," Tyler uses "I," "my," and "selfe" more than 100 times in these four pages.  That is more often than she uses "the," "of," or "to."  This might suggest that Tyler actually felt some ownership over the material and gives herself a more prominent position than the "author" (used three times), "Spanish" or "Spaniard" (used 7 times), or the "history."  While references to women and men are nearly even, the "reader" is mentioned a mere six times, which may contradict Lieber's argument for the reader's authority mentioned above.1016 uses of "women," "woman," "womans," "lady," "ladies," "gentlewoman," and "gentlewomen," and 13 uses of "manlike," "manlinesse," "mans," "men," "gentleman," and "gentlemen."  Some of the female references are self-references in her argument about appropriate women's writing.  Deborah Uman and Belén Bistué offer an excellent analysis of moments when Tyler's translation demonstrates co-authorship in "Translation as Collaborative Authorship."Publishing The Mirrour (1579 and 2008)Even setting aside theoretical questions about translation as co-authorship, the work demonstrates an addition hand (or hands) in both its content and its format.  One simple example is in the structure of the translation—the placement and titles of the chapter divisions have been changed.  Someone—Tyler, the printer, or the typesetters—adjusted these for the English edition, presumably because these divisions were considered "better" than those of the original for this audience.  The changes are most likely made by Tyler or the printer, Thomas East.  The descriptive titles necessitate knowing the entire chapter; it seems unlikely that someone laying out the text would read ahead to create such headings.  It is difficult to say that these are certainly Tyler's, however, as someone in the printing process added other elements to the text, such as the side-notes in "To the Reader."11Though some of these notes are "anonymous" because they are merely descriptive of the content of the passage, others demonstrate that they were written by someone other than Tyler: "That a vvoman of your yeares maye vvrite in this argument," "That you maie not write of diuinitie," "That you meant to make a common benefit of your paines" (italics added).  Again, the typesetters could put these in, but the direct address suggests a more personal relationship between the note-author and Tyler, so Thomas East seems the likely author.  The digital edition also has a few editorial notes; all of these have been marked with an ∗.  The quantity and quality of these changes, especially between the Spanish and English content, is a fruitful spot for further examination.12Uman and Bistué have begun this work.  They provide analysis of some titles that Tyler changed (300, 313-14).East published a wide range of materials; he is best known today for his work publishing music.13See for example Jeremy L. Smith's Thomas East and Music Publishing in Renaissance England.  It may be strange to picture the same public browsing for the latest ballad picking up a the first volume of this new Spanish romance, but East's increased publication of fiction and narrative works after The Mirrour and John Lyly's Euphues, including romances, travelogues, histories, and works by Sir Thomas Malory, Ovid, and Edmund Spenser suggests it was profitable.14Gleaned from an EEBO search, November 11, 2008; Woodruff Library, Emory University.  East might be trying to appeal to a wide range of potential customers by stocking both music and long prose works, but if the same customer is expected to be interested in buying both music and multi-volume prose, the suggestion is of a consumer with both money and time to spare on luxuries.It is certain that East benefited from The Mirrour.  The book sold well enough to be reprinted to two more surviving editions (1580, 1599) and for R.P. (perhaps Robert Parry or Robert Parke) to continue with two more volumes of the translation (part 2 in 1585 and 1599, and part 3 in 1586 and 1599) for East.15The parts of The Mirrour were published in pieces labeled as "parts" and "books" which were combined or divided into eight bound volumes.  I follow Henry Thomas and Dorothy Atkinson in referring to them all as "parts" of whole.  Their publication information, in narrative order:
The first part: Published by Thomas East ("Thomas Este") in 1578, 1580, and 1599.  Translated by Margaret Tyler ("M.T." on title page and "To the Reader" and "Margaret Tyler" on dedication).  Titled variously The mirrour of princely deedes and knighthood and The first part of the Mirrour of princely deedes and knighthood.  Images available on EEBO, although first edition is incomplete.The second part: Published by Thomas East ("Thomas Este") in 1585, 1598, and 1599.  Translated by Robert Parry or Robert Parke ("R.P.").  Images available on EEBO.The third part: Published by Thomas East ("Thomas Este") in 1586 and 1598.  Translated by Robert Parry or Robert Parke ("R.P.").  Images available on EEBO.The fourth part: Published by Thomas East ("Thomas Este") in 1583 and 1598.  Translated by Robert Parry or Robert Parke ("R.P.").  Images available on EEBO.The fifth part:  Published by Thomas East ("Thomas Este") in 1583 and 1598 in the same volume as the fourth part. Translated by Robert Parry or Robert Parke ("R.P.").  Images available on EEBO.The sixth part: Published by Edwarde Allde in 1598.  Translated by Robert Parry or Robert Parke ("R.P.").  Images available on EEBO.The seventh part: Published by Thomas Purfoot for Cuthbert Burbey in 1598.  No translator listed, but dedication signed "L.A."  Images available on EEBO.The eighth part: Published by Thomas Creede for Cuthbert Burbey in 1599.  No translator listed, but dedication and "To the Reader" signed "L.A."  Images available on EEBO.The ninth part: Published by Simon Stafford for Cuthbert Burbey ("Burbie") in 1601.  Images available on EEBO.The books were successful enough that East reprinted his three volumes in 1599, approximately twenty years after the first volume's début.  There is no certain reason behind this.  A play that Joseph de Perott argues is based the series was produced in 1578-79; it possible that the play and the translation were initially spurred by the original Spanish volumes and certainly difficult to ascertain which might have come earlier in the same year (Herbert Murch 105).   Instead, East would seem to be picking the wrong time to reprint, as The Mirrour had just been condemned by name as inappropriate reading for youth in Francis Meres's Palladis Tamia: Wits Miscellany in 1598 (Coad ix, Meres 269 (left)).  The reprint seems an early confirmation of the adage, there is no such thing as bad publicity.  More concretely, however, East's reprinting coincides with the Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, and Ninth books being published by various other printers.16The Sixth was published in 1598; the Seventh in 1598; the Eighth in 1599; and the Ninth in 1601 (EEBO).  East at least seems to disagree with Eisenberg's claim about Spanish readers approaching the books as individual works; East seems to see his initial volumes as part of a series and likely to sell now that the final volumes had been published.The text also suggests the working methods of East's press.  The header is alternatively spelled as "Mirrour" or "Myrrour" in batches and there are repeated confusions over the work's pagination occurring at these changes, indicating at least two hands at work in the layout.  Tyler's volume also suggests a bit of haste or lack of care, as the page numbering changes format on page 17 and is often incorrect.  This edition both provides a modern, consistent numbering (marked as the digital edition) and preserves the original page numbering (marked as the 1579 edition).   Incorrect pagination of the original edition has been retained with the correct number following in brackets; pages without numbers (the introductory material and the left-hand pages) have been given page numbers in brackets.  Left-hand pages are marked with an L; e.g. the page facing 153 would appear as [153L].  These page numbers appear to the left of the text as digital / original.17All further citation from the body of The Mirrour will be cited with the original page number first, followed by the page number from the digital edition.  Some pages strongly favor "y for i" spellings, while others show a more modern use of the letters. The text also uses superscript letters representing abbreviated forms of "that," "the," "thou," and "with."  These have been rendered as, respectively, y^t, y^e, y^u, and w^t according to the procedure of EEBO and Project Gutenberg.18EEBO's Text Creation Partnership instructions to transcribers can be found here and Project Gutenberg's here.  The printing in the first edition of The Mirrour is especially questionable in rendering superscript letters; the choices here reflect a reader's experience in being the best guess of the editor according to context.  The work predictably uses the long s common to the period and two forms of lower-case r, but those have not been rendered here, again following EEBO and Project Gutenberg.Some choices unfamiliar to the modern reader been retained, however.  The Mirrour also often uses a line over a vowel as an abbreviation for an immediately following n or m (e.g. "commaunded" is rendered as "cōmaunded").19These characters have been coded as though they are macrons as this choice seems the most likely to display correctly.  The editor asks readers to be aware, however, that the originals are not true macrons but abbreviations.  See the discussion on the TEI listserv beginning 16 October 2008.    Words with double e are often, though not always, marked with an acute accent.  Where possible, these marks have been recorded; however, many such marks may not be rendered here because of the quality of the printing or the quality of the extant edition.  These are not loan words from French and it is important to remember that Tyler expressly claims she is translating directly from the Spanish rather than through an intermediary French version to which we might credit these accents.  Alexander J. Ellis suggests that such accents mark a diphthong sound (Section VIII, p 77).  East often used this accent, and it is not limited to works in translation, a specific set of authors, or a single era of typesetting in his printing house.20Other examples of the use of an acute accent for double e: The Foundation of Rhetorike by Richard Rainolde printed by John Kingston in 1563.  Other uses in East's publishing include: John Bale's The Image of Both Churches After the Most Wonderfull and Heauenly Reuelation of Sainct Iohn the Euangelist in 1570, Batman vppon Bartholome by Stephen Batman and Anglicus Bartholomaeus in 1582, the anonymously authored Syr Bevis of Hampton in 1585, and Richard Jones's A Briefe and Necessarie Catechisme in 1583.  These accents only appear in Blackletter works, though they do appear in Blackletter sections of works that also include Roman fonts.  This argument is born out in a key example.  Edmund Spenser's work, well known for his intentional use of specific "archaic" spellings, has a second edition of The Shepheards Calendar published by East.  Only in this second edition does the acute accent over the double e appear.21The last word on the right-hand page, "yeeres," provides an excellent example of the addition of an acute accent by East, while the many words with double e on the left-hand page demonstrate East's contrasting methods for Roman and Blackletter fonts.  Example of the first edition.  Example of the second edition.  This mark appears only in the Blackletter poems, not in E.K.'s Roman commentary on the text.  If the accent reflects the length or stress of the vowel, then it would affect the length or meter of the line, surprising in a work so concerned with meter.  If the accent mark reflects a change in the pronunciation, it may be that Spenser's archaic spellings were of more importance for their look than their sound.  It is interesting to note, however, that when a rhymed word has an accent mark, so does its mate, which suggests the printer was matching the pronunciations to preserve the rhyme.  Yet it is also difficult to imagine "see" and "yeeres" / "peeres" having the same pronunciation, though all three include the accent in June (stanzas 3, 5).The Mirrour's AudienceAlthough seventeenth-century critiques of romances suggest that the reading audience was primarily female, Tyler's Dedication and "To the Reader" present a more diverse picture.  As Helen Hackett notes, the prefatory pieces of the next volumes address a male readership and "early editions [of Iberian romances] evince no intention, feigned or otherwise, to appeal to a female audience" (68).  Certainly, Tyler does not exclude male readers; in fact, she seems to presume they will be her audience.  The Mirrour's "chiefe matter . . . is of exploits of wars, & the parties therin named, are especially renowmed for their magnanimitie & courage" ([iii]).  As mentioned above, this content is supposed to inspire similar virtues in those who read it; since these are traits traditionally associated with masculinity, it is not surprising that Tyler claims Ortúñez de Calahorra's intent is to "bring thée to a liking of the vertues héerein commended, and by example therof in thy princes & countries quarrel to hazard thy person & purchase good name" and "to set on fire the lustie courages of yoūg gentlemen, to the aduauncement of their line, by ensuing such like steps" ([iii]).  Like eating, drinking, and even playgoing, reading, it seems, was expected to have an effect on the inner state of a person.  In a world slowly abandoning humeral understandings of the body (East did print a wide range of medical texts, including Galen), the qualities of one's reading could be seen as having a direct and significant impact on one's body and mind.  Tyler's defense of her work is to emphasize that it might be historical ("To the Reader" [i]) and, more importantly, regardless of its degree of truth, the effects of its examples are beneficial for the reader.22Eisenberg reports that Spanish romances "always declared, sincerely or no, a moral intent" (Romances 13, continued discussion page 45 and following).  Sir Philip Sidney in his Defence of Posey claims a similar effect for another romance: "I haue knowen men, that euen with reading Amadis de Gaule, (which God knoweth wanteth much of a perfect Poesie,) haue found their harts mooued to the exercise of courtesie, liberalitie, and especially courage" (qtd. Henry Thomas 265).23It is on these same grounds that many, including Ascham, object to the reading of romances.This effect of romances would make them unsuitable reading for early modern women.  Tyler carefully avoids any discussion of the masculine traits a romance may inspire when arguing for the appropriateness of a female readership  There she focuses on a less well-defined virtue—the "truth" that can be gleaned by searching the text.  Helen Hackett points out that "Tyler's epistle is … implicitly an argument for women to be allowed to read romances as well as to emulate her in translating them," but that it is not until the final parts of the series that prefatory materials explicitly promote the works to a female readership (61).24Uman and Bistué agree that Tyler's argument for women writing begins with an argument for the appropriateness of women reading his material, which implies a (not exclusively) female audience for The Mirrour (310).  It is presumed that romances would be affective, but have different effects of each sex.  Later, male readers will be mocked for emulating romance's active morality (as in Don Quixote), while female readers will be criticized for their enjoyment of the idealized love stories, a pleasure not even mentioned in Tyler's prefatory material.An interesting indication of both romance's readership and its connections to other genres comes from the diary of Lady Anne Clifford.  Tina Krontiris notes that Clifford lists "The Faerie Queene, The Arcadia, and Ovid's Metamorphoses, The Government of the Turks, and Chaucer" alongside romances in her diary (28); all apparently appealed to the same reader.  Yet, as Schleiner points out, "waiting women read to her when she wanted to hear a romance, while male attendants read if the work was something serious, such as a treatise on Turkish government" (4n10).  Although one woman is the intended audience, the works are already, even while the genre is still developing, gendered.As Joseph de Perott discovers, the series as a whole was widely influential; he finds references to it in Beaumont and Fletcher's works (Philaster, The Knight of the Burning Pestle and many more) and suggests it may be source material for Shakespeare's The Tempest (76-8).  The original Spanish itself is rather infamously mentioned as one of the instigations of Don Quixote's quest and this kind of off-hand reference to the book's imaginative power is commonplace.25Eisenberg points out that this derogatory reference may have retarded scholarship on The Mirrour and its companions: "The romances which have received far and away the greatest amount of study, Amadis de Gaula, Tirant lo Blanch, and Palmerin de Inglaterra, are the ones which are praised in the escrutinio de la libreria.  The authors who are seldom studied … are neglected because of the censure of their works which we find in the Quijote" (Romances xvi).   William Winstanley's parody of the effect of romances (a clear parallel to Don Quixote) casts a young man, Billy, in the role of Don Quixote.  The Mirrour appears in a long catalog of books bought by Billy's father to continue his learning.  After he has finished Tom Thumb, Robin Goodfellow, and the like, he now can read well enough to get a mix of plays, romances, and histories including Doctor Faustus, Friar Bacon [and Father Bungay], Reynard the Fox, Bevis of Southampton, Guy of Warwick, Palmerin of England, Parismus and Parismenes, The Destruction of Troy, a History of King Arthur, Hero and Leander, Pheander the Maiden Knight and more (4-5).  The list also includes two references to The Mirrour: the father buys both The Knight of the Sun and The Mirror of Knighthood (5).  The son, Billy, "was not a little brag of his Books for he imagined he had not as good a Library as the best Scholar in Christendom" (5).  This little scholar also demonstrates the effects of these books; Billy begins to attack the servants during his sleep because "he thought himself to be really engaged in these imaginary Fights" (5).  This parody continues as Billy runs away for imagined adventures, even writing love poems to the neighbor's daughter Joan Grumball, whom he addresses as Dulcina (6).The status of the book and references to a "mirror of knighthood" have a rapid decline.26It is nearly certain that these are references to The Mirrour series, as the phrase does not appear in any full-text works in EEBO before the first volume's publication in 1578-80.  In fact, they seem to begin around the time of the reprinting of the first three volumes and the first publication of the final volumes.  Perhaps this is more than mere coincidence—the availability of the complete work may have been an "event" in public consciousness, though the purchasing of nine volumes at once from several publishers would seem to be beyond most purses.  Henry Thomas catalogs many of these references and many more to other romances, to "knight of the sun," and various character names from The Mirrour in his Spanish and Portuguese Romances of Chivalry: The Revival of the Romance of Chivalry in the Spanish Peninsula, and its Extension and Influence Abroad.   He traces a similar decline in the use of Lindabrides's name (a character who does not appear in this volume) from a positive synonym for mistress to an unfaithful or treacherous woman (272-75, 298-99).  Note that I demonstrate here merely references to "mirror of knighthood"; many more works reference "Knight of the Sun," "Rosicleer," and other character names.  In 1598, the phrase can be used as the leading praise of "THE THRISE GENEROVS AND NOBLE Gentleman Sir Calisthines Brooke Knight, one of her Maiesties chiefe Commanders in IRELAND" to whom the book is dedicated.27From Robert Tofte's "TO THE THRISE GENEROVS AND NOBLE Gentleman Sir Calisthines Brooke Knight, one of her Maiesties chiefe Commanders in IRELAND"; the poem's first line is: "Mirror of Knighthood, WORTHIES Caualiere."   In 1612, Gervase Markham echoes the title to sell his own romance: The most famous and renowned historie, of that woorthie and illustrous knight Meruine, sonne to that rare and excellent mirror of princely prowesse, Oger the Dane, and one of that royall bond of vnmatchable knighthoode, the twelue peeres of France.  In 1602, just after the full series is published, things begin to change.  In that year a character in Thomas Dekker's Satiro—mastix. Or The vntrussing of the humorous poet refers to someone as "the first part of the Mirrour of Knighthood" in (perhaps iconic) endearment, while in John Marston's The history of Antonio and Mellida, The first part Signior Balurdo is reported to have wished: "O for Don Bessiclers armour, in the Mirror of Knighthood."28Satiro—mastix is unnumbered; this is from EEBO document image 24, .    The history of Antonio and Mellida, The first part is also unnumbered; this is from EEBO document image 12,  Objections to The Mirrour and its ilk quickly build after an English translation of Don Quixote is published in 1612.  By mocking romances as a genre for their negative effects, Don Quixote opens a floodgate for similar critiques.  William Vaughan in 1626 praises Don Quixote for its ability "to reclaime a riotous running wit from taking delight in those prodigious, idle, and time-wasting Bookes, called the Mirrour of Knighthood, the Knights of the Round Table, Palmerin de Oliua, and the like rabblement, deuised no doubt by the Deuill to confirme soules in the knowledge of euill" (11).  The works mocking The Mirrour and its readers, using "mirror of knighthood" as purely ironic praise, or arguing against its desultory influence come flooding in.29See for example: Thomas Overbury's "A Chamber-Mayde" (1615), John Taylor's A shilling or, The trauailes of twelue-pence (1621), John Davies's A scourge for paper-persecutors. Or Papers complaint, compil'd in ruthfull rimes, against the paper-spoylers of these times (1625), Philip Massinger's The Guardian (1655), Samuel Butler's Hudibras (1663), George Etherege's The Comical Revenge, or, Love in a Tub (1664), John Wilson's Belphegor, or, The marriage of the Devil (1691), William Congreve's The Old Batchelour (1693), William Winstanley's The Essex champion (1690), and Erasmus's Seven New Colloquies (published in English in 1699).  These mocking references are almost always by males describing other males and in male-authored works, which suggests there is a male reading public familiar with the work, familiar enough to use its title as a slur.  Yet most of these references also appear in works intended for broad appeal; an author could apparently expect a reference to The Mirrour to be understood by much of the work's audience.There is also the question of how such books were to be read.  Some have argued that romances changed the reading experience to one that "protects by privacy whatever thought, response, fantasy, approval, or disapproval arises from the exposure.  As a distinctly private activity, reading inspires reconsiderations of one's boundaries: economic, social, physical, geographic, or political" (Naomi Conn Liebler 3).  This is certainly our modern conception of reading, but it is less clear if this method had developed before Tyler's publication.  As Lady Clifford's diary indicates, at least some of her "reading" was listening to someone else read aloud; the Princess Olivia in The Mirrour also often has her waiting-woman read aloud to her even her most private letters (though she is also literate, as she writes to Rosicleer).  Reading early romances may have more in common with storytelling than with the modern reading experience, especially if, as some have suggested, some "readers" might be expected to translate as they read aloud.30This also may be a reading experience limited to the upper-echelons of society.  Lady Clifford had more than one literate person in her household to read to her; the same may not be true of a merchant's daughter with the means to buy a romance but perhaps not the means or status to hire a literate serving woman.  One is tempted to speculate that a group of lower-status women might also have a shared the reading experience as one read to a group while the others sewed.  These shifting methods of reading follow Walter Benjamin's theory of the developing novel's effect: "A man listening to a story is in the company of the storyteller; even a man reading one shares this companionship.  The reader of a novel, however, is isolated, more so than any other reader … the reader of a novel seizes upon his material more jealously than anyone else.  He is ready to make it completely his own, to devour it, as it were" (100).  This devouring is similar to the overwhelming effects of romances mocked by Cervantes and others.  A further limit to reading the text may come from its use of Blackletter for the body of the story (it uses Roman font for marginal material).  Some readers may have been limited to reading either the Roman or Blackletter font (Keith Thomas 100).31Charles Mish also suggests that by 1600 printing a romance in Blackletter signaled it was for a "middle-class" reading audience.  He differentiates between the Blackletter font used for "crude and old-fashioned stor[ies] of open-mouthed wonder" and for "chivalric romances" aimed at the "middle class" and the Roman font used for "the artistically and culturally more advanced romance, exciting admiration rather than wonder" and for "sentimental or heroic romances" preferred by the "upper-class" audience (627-28).  Winstanley's work, among others, suggests that the categories were less precise—works from either side of Mish's divide often appear condemned together.  Modern readers may be encouraged by this Roman rendering, especially those considering assigning the text to students.  The volume also uses a Roman font (inconsistently) for proper names; we have rendered in bold those that the original marked so as to preserve the reading experience of the original text for a modern audience.Though initially sold on moral grounds, the text offers wide-ranging pleasures for modern and early modern readers.  The book deals at length with illicit sex and its aftermath, battles against impossible odds, world travel and its accompanying marvels and adventures, and philosophical debates and moralizing asides.  While the text itself sets up tension and uncertainty, those are often undercut by the chapter headings and always by the assurance of the genre itself, which presumes the hero will triumph over adversity, regardless of the odds.  The pleasure is in seeing how the hero navigates the predestined situation and that wording is accurate—the hero's success is predicated on his virtue, which was determined by his noble birth and beauty and is confirmed by his faith.32The text is careful to note that the Knight of the Sun (Donzel del Febo) is favored by God ("which had created him with so wonderfull marks" (31/61)) and although raised by the "Souldan" in Babylon he will convert ("The wise Lyrgandeo likewise carefull of the gentleman of the Sunne, & of Brandizel, read vnto them diligently what was cōuenient, saue that as he was a Pagan, so hee acquainted them onely with Pagansie in their religion: Which errour notwithstanding afterwarde they both renounced.") (36/71).  As Daniel Eisenberg notes, "Problema fundamental para la teología medieval era cómo justificar la condenación al infierno de aquellos—por ejemplo, los que vivían antes de Cristo—que no tenín ni de conocer el camino de la salvación.  La contestación a que se llegaba era que, aunque con mayor dificultad, pudieran llegar los antiguos—a menudo Virgilio es el ejemplo que lo demuestra—a la teología cristiana por observaciín de la naturaleza" ("Introduction" 7 n9).  There are also the long suspenses, only partly resolved in this volume, of how and when Trebatio and Briana's family will reunite and their hidden identities be revealed.Scholars have already demonstrated some interest in the laudatory appearances of the daughter of Diana, a conquered Amazon queen, named Claridiana.  Claridiana is also the only female character mentioned in Espejo de príncipes y cavalleros's summary (located after Ortúñez de Calahorra's Prologue and the table of contents) and in the title of later Spanish editions, which suggests she was perceived as a selling point for the Spanish audience.  Her role is also minimized in the English edition of the first part, an intriguing difference that Uman and Bistué unpack in "Translation as Collaborative Authorship."  The Mirrour may also enhance work on understandings of race and ethnicity in the early modern period with several potentially "dark" characters. The "Tartarian" knight Prince Zoylo is described as "a Morian borne, & somewhat of colour tawnie, yet had he a manly countenaunce, and therwithall pleasant, that he pleased them as well as his companions" (153/305).  The English edition makes much of Zoylo's heritage, often referring to him as "the Tartarian" rather than by his name (which is not true of many other foreign knights), yet the book also lavishes praise on his prowess (he defeats both Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro and is nearly Rosicleer's equal).  The Mirrour also describes the evil Raiartes in racially loaded terms: "his face to be very foule and fearefull, of coloure more tawnie and sunburnt, then cole blacke, hys eyes flaminge in his heade, his nostrels wide and large, broade lippped, and his sharpe fanges issuing out of his mouth like boares tuskes, and reaching to his chinne, so that there was no man liuinge but might haue bene afraied of hys fierce semblaunce. But besides this, hee was so highe that there was not any in that place whom this knight excéeded not two spanfulles at the least, and in makinge of his body he was so large and well quartered, more them the compasse of two knightes" ([43L]/84).  The usurping and dreaded Africano, "the brauest and boldest knight that euer was in all the coastes of Africke," is also a potential place for such analysis though he is described with non-racial characteristics (as a "Gyant" and a "Pagan") ([30L]/58). Summary of The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and KnighthoodThe Emperor Trebatio of Greece goes to war against Tiberio, the king of Hungary, to revenge Hungarian raiding in Greece.  While in Hungary, Trebatio hears of the beauty of the Hungarian Princess Briana, betrothed to Hungary's ally Great Britain's Prince Edward.  On his way to meet and marry Briana, Edward is ambushed and killed by Trebatio who takes his name and place in the marriage.  Trebatio sneaks into Briana's garden and consummates the marriage, conceiving twin sons.  Trebatio then returns to his forces besieging Belgrade, only to be distracted by a chariot carrying away a woman he believes is Briana.  Following the chariot, he is magically imprisoned by Lindaraza (Lyndaraza) for twenty years (though he believes it is only a few hours or days) and she bears him a son.  Meanwhile, Briana's bears twins in secret, known only to her waiting woman, the aptly named Clandestria, who fosters the boys in her sister's house.  Eventually, Clandestria works out a plan for these children to be raised in the court, near their still-undiscovered mother Briana.  The boys are remarkable for their beauty and for certain birthmarks.  Donzel del Febo (or the Knight of the Sun) is born with "a little face figured [on his side], shining as bright as if it has ben a little Sunne" and his brother Rosicleer is born with "a white Rose fashioned of so perfect making, that it séemed to be gathered, from some arbour of Roses" (21/41).Shortly after coming to the court, Donzel del Febo is lost in a river that flows into the sea.  He is rescued by Prince Florion, the usurped ruler of Persia, who brings the Donzel del Febo to the court of Orixerges, the "Souldan of Babilon" (26[29]/57).  Florion has also rescued Prince Clauergudo of France and keeps both in the Babylonian court because of a prophecy that they will win him back his kingdom.  After many early deeds of valor, Donzel del Febo is knighted as a young man, changing his name to "The Knight of the Sun."  He defeats the attacking Africano, the man who had previously conquered Florion's kingdom and sets Florion back on his throne.  Upon returning to Babylon, he is separated from Clauergudo.Rosicleer meanwhile grows up in Hungary, but soon develops wanderlust.  His mother, still in mourning for her lost husband and Donzel del Febo, reveals to Rosicleer his parentage in an effort to keep him nearby.  Rosicleer's desire to do great deeds sets him on "y^e quest of seking Prince Edward & Donzel del Febo his brother" in Great Britain (69/136).  On his way, Rosicleer liberates a valley from the tyrant Argion by cross-dressing as the young woman whom Argion had ordered to his bed.  Taking with him a squire Telyo, Rosicleer proceeds via a roundabout way to a tournament in Great Britain, meeting other knights and finding out through magic that his father and brother are alive.  Rosicleer wins the tournament at the court of King Oliuerio (Oliverio) and falls in love with Oliverio's daughter Oliuia (Olivia).One of Briana's gentlewomen travels on her behalf to her supposed father-in-law's court.  She calls Rosicleer away to battle a giant and after he succeeds, he and two companions decide to travel the country as knights errant, sending tokens of their love to their ladies at Oliverio's court.  Rosicleer's token is hidden, but accepted with joy by Olivia.  She inquires of Briana's gentlewoman about Rosicleer's birth and upon hearing of his supposed low parentage, takes the counsel of her waiting woman Fidelia.  After regretting the need for status as well as virtue in a wooer, Olivia rejects him and banishes him from Great Britain.  Before receiving his banishment, Rosicleer and his companions the Princes Liriamandro and Bargandel fight and become friends with Zoylo. But banishing Rosicleer does not cure Olivia's love for him, and to assuage her illness she asks Fidelia to steal a letter Rosicleer is sending to Briana via her waiting-woman.  From this letter, Olivia learns of Rosicleer's true parentage and sends Fidelia to seek and recall him to Oliverio's court.  Meanwhile, a knight of Spain has asked and been granted Olivia's hand in a betrothal.After his banishment, Rosicleer is tricked into a battle with multiple giants and many knights, from which his unknown brother, the Knight of the Sun, succors him.  Shortly after rescuing his brother, The Knight of the Sun is accidentally set to sea and floats to Lindaraza's castle and battles his way inside.  Not knowing his father but recognizing an enchantment, the Knight of the Sun rescues Trebatio and accidentally kills Lindaraza in the process.  The two set out for Hungary.Not knowing of his secret banishment, three knights who were companions of Rosicleer go to seek him.  These three—Zoylo, Liriamandro, and Bargandel—meet with Clarindiana, "the daughter to Theodoro Lord of this Empyre and to the Empresse Diana Quéene of the Amazones" (142[151]/301).  Rosicleer, meanwhile, has left the scene of his last battle and goes to restore Princess Arguirosa to her throne in Thessaly.  After defeating the usurper Rolando, Rosicleer departs Thessaly.The Knight of the Sun and Trebatio travel back to Hungary where they are able to rescue Clandestria and another of Briana's waiting-women from an attempted rape.  Clandestria recognizes the man she knows as Prince Edward and Briana's husband because he has not aged under the enchantment, though he has been gone for 20 years.  The company travels towards Briana, but the Knight of the Sun soon departs to stand as a champion for a woman unfairly accused of adultery so that her husband might seize her lands.  On his way to that fight, he is waylaid by a lady who asks that he defend her honor—in order to cross into Belgrade she has been asked to swear that another woman is more beautiful than she is.  The Knight of the Sun is successful in both the lighthearted and the serious battle and remains in the Hungarian court.  Trebatio has a delighted reunion with Briana where he reveals his true identity.  Their elopement to Greece ends this volume.For Further ReadingThis list catalogs some of the work on early modern readers, early modern women writers, and early modern English romances though it is suggestive rather than exhaustive.  It does not include the many fine anthologies of early modern women's writing now available, other romances currently available in print or on electronic databases, or critical work on individual early modern women writers or romances other than Margaret Tyler and The Mirrour.  Please see the Works Cited list for additional key work.Andersen, Jennifer and Elizabeth Sauer, eds.  Books and Readers in Early Modern England: Material Studies.  Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 2002.Chedgzoy, Kate, Melanie Hansen, and Suzanne Trill, eds.  Voicing Women: Gender and Sexuality in Early Modern Writing.  Keele, UK: Keele UP, 1996.Clarke, Danielle.  The Politics of Early Modern Women's Writing.  Harlow: Pearson, 2001.Cressy, David.  Literacy and Social Order: Reading and Writing in Tudor and Stuart England.  Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1980.Ezell, Margaret.  The Patriarch's Wife: Literary Evidence and the History of the Family.  Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P, 1987.---.  Writing Women's Literary History.  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1993.Ferguson, Margaret.  Dido's Daughters: Literacy, Gender, and Empire in Early Modern England and France.  Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2003.Goldberg, Jonathan.  Desiring Women Writing: Renaissance Examples.  Stanford: Stanford UP, 1997.Hull, Suzanne.  Chaste, Silent & Obedient: English Books for Women, 1475-1640.  San Marino: Huntington Library, 1982.Jagodzinski, Cecile.  Privacy and Print: Reading and Writing in Seventeenth-Century England.  Charlottesville: UP of Virginia, 1999.Lucas, Caroline.  Writing for Women: The Example of Woman as Reader in Elizabethan Romance.  Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1989.Newcomb, Lori Humphrey.  Reading Popular Romance in Early Modern England.  New York: Columbia UP, 2002.Ortúñez de Calahorra, Diego.  Espejo de príncipes y cavalleros.  Vol. 1.  Ed. Daniel Eisenberg.  Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, S.A., 1975.Pearson, Jacqueline.  "Women Reading, Reading Women."  Women and Literature in Britain 1500-1700.  Ed. Helen Wilcox.  Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996.  80-99.Raven, James, Helen Small, and Naomi Tadmor, eds.  The Practice and Representation of Reading in England.  Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996.Relihan, Constance.  Fashioning Authority: The Development of Elizabethan Novelistic Discourse.  Kent, Ohio, Kent State UP, 1994.Roberts, Sasha.  "Reading in Early Modern England: Contexts and Problems."  Critical Survey 12 (2000): 1-16.Salzman, Paul.  Reading Early Modern Women's Writing.  Oxford: Oxford UP, 2006.Sharpe, Kevin.  Reading Revolutions: the Politics of Reading in Early Modern England.  New Haven and London: Yale UP, 2000.Snook, Edith.  Women, Reading, and the Cultural Politics of Early Modern England.  Aldershot: Ashgate, 2005.Suzuki, Mihoko.  Subordinate Subjects: Gender, the Political Nation, and Literary Form in England, 1588-1688.  Aldershot: Ashgate, 2003. Traub, Valerie, Lindsay Kaplan, and Dympna Callaghan, eds.  Feminist Readings of Early Modern Culture.  Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996.Wall, Wendy.  The Imprint of Gender: Authorship and Publication in the Renaissance.  Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993.Wray, Ramona.  "Recovering the Reading of Renaissance Englishwomen: Deployments of Autobiography."  Critical Survey 12 (2000): 33-48.Works CitedPlease note that I have not cited here works mentioned in passing.  For those interested in investigating further, the early modern works can be found in digital editions on EEBO.  Publication information for early modern books comes from EEBO.Benjamin, Walter.  "The Storyteller: Reflections on the Works of Nikolai Leskov."  Illuminations.  Ed. Hannah Arendt.  Trans. Harry Zorn.  New York: Harvard UP, 1968.  83-107.  Reprinted in Narrative Theory: Critical Concepts in Literary and Cultural Studies.  Ed. Mieke Bal.  London: Taylor & Francis, 2004.  88-106.Coad, Kathryn.  "Introductory Note."  Volume 8: Margaret Tyler. The Early Modern Englishwoman: A Facsimile Library of Essential Works.  Part 1: Printed Writings, 1500-1640.  Aldershot: Scolar Press, 1996.  ix-xi.Cokayne, George E.  The Complete Peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain, and the United Kingdom, Extant, Extinct, or Dormant.  London: St. Catherine P, 1910-59.Dekker, Thomas.  Satiro—mastix.  Or The vntrussing of the humorous poet.  London: Edward Allde, 1602.  EEBO. Eisenberg, Daniel.  "Introduction."  Espejo de príncipes y cavalleros.  Vol. 1.  Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, S.A., 1975.---.  Romances of Chivalry in the Spanish Golden Age.  Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta—Hispanic Monographs, 1982.Ellis, Alexander.  The Existing Phonology of English Dialects Compared with that of West Saxon Speech.  On Early English Pronunciation.  Part V.  London: Trübner & Co., 1889. Ferguson, Moira.  First Feminists: British Women Writers 1578-1799. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1985. Gallagher, Catherine.  "A History of Precedent: Rhetorics of Legitimation in Women's Writing."  Critical Inquiry 26.2 (Winter 2000): 309-327.Hackett, Helen.  Women and Romance Fiction in the English Renaissance.  Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2000.Krontiris, Tina.  Oppositional Voices: Women as Writers and Translators of Literature in the English Renaissance.  London: Routledge, 1992.Liebler, Naomi Conn.  "Introduction: The Cultural Politics of Reading."  Early Modern Prose Fiction: The Cultural Politics of Reading.  New York: Routledge, 2007.  1-17.Markham, Gervase.  The most famous and renowned historie, of that woorthie and illustrous knight Meruine, sonne to that rare and excellent mirror of princely prowesse, Oger the Dane, and one of that royall bond of vnmatchable knighthoode, the twelue peeres of France Wherein is declared, his rare birth, and stranger bringing vp, with his most honorable conquest of Ierusalem, Babilon, and diuers other cities from the pagan infidels: with many other memorable accidents of wonderous consequence.  London: R. Blower and Val. Sims, 1612.  EEBO. Marston, John.  The history of Antonio and Mellida.  The first part.  London: Richard Bradock, 1602.  EEBO.  Massinger, Philip.  The Guardian.  Three new playes; viz. The bashful lover, Guardian, Very woman.  London: Humphrey Moseley, 1655.  EEBO.  Meres, Francis.  Palladis Tamia: Wits Miscellany.  London: P. Short, 1598.Mish, Charles.  "Black Letter as a Social Discriminant in the Seventeenth Century."  PMLA 68.3 (June 1953): 627-630.Murch, Herbert S.  "Notes."  The Knight of the Burning Pestle.  New York: Henry Holt and Co., 1908.  105-274.Perott, Joseph de.  "Beaumont and Fletcher and The Mirrour of Knighthood."  Modern Language Notes 22.3 (March 1907): 76-78.---.  "The Mirrour of Knighthood."  The Romantic Review 4 (Oct.-Dec. 1913): 397-402.Schleiner, Louise.  "Margaret Tyler, Translator and Waiting Woman."  ELN 29.3 (March 1992): 1-8.Smith, Jeremy.  Thomas East and Music Publishing in Renaissance England.  Oxford: Oxford UP, 2003.Spenser, Edmund.  The Shepheards Calendar.  London: Hugh Singleton, 1579.---.  The Shepheards Calendar.  London: Thomas East, 1581.Thomas, Keith.  "The Meaning of Literacy in England."  The Written Word: Literacy in Transition.  Ed. Gerd Baumann.  Oxford: Clarendon P, 1986.  97-131.Thomas, Henry.  Spanish and Portuguese Romances of Chivalry: The Revival of the Romance of Chivalry in the Spanish Peninsula, and its Extension and Influence Abroad.  Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1920.Tofte, Robert.  "TO THE THRISE GENEROVS AND NOBLE Gentleman Sir Calisthines Brooke Knight, one of her Maiesties chiefe Commanders in IRELAND."  Alba The months minde of a melancholy louer, diuided into three parts.  London: Felix Kingston, 1598.  Dedication.  EEBO.  Tyler, Margaret, Trans.  The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood.  London: Thomas East, 1579?  Digitial edition.  Ed. Irene Middleton.  Emory Women Writers Resource Project.  December 2008.Tyler, Margaret.  The Mirror of Princely Deeds and Knighthood (Introductory Material).  Digital edition.  Women Writers Online.  Brown University.  December 3, 2008.  Uman, Deborah and Belén Bistué.  "Translation as Collaborative Authorship: Margaret Tyler's The Mirrour of Princely Deedes and Knighthood."  Comparative Literature Studies 44.3 (2007): 298-323.Vaughan, William.  The golden fleece diuided into three parts, vnder which are discouered the errours of religion, the vices and decayes of the kingdome, and lastly the wayes to get wealth, and to restore trading so much complayned of.   London: William Stansby, Miles Flsher, and another, 1626.  EEBO. Winstanley, William.  The Essex champion, or, The famous history of Sir Billy Billerecay and his squire Ricardo.  London: J. Blare, 1690?. EEBO. ¶ The Mirrour of Princelydeedes and Knighthood:Wherein is shewed the worthinesse of the Knight of the Sunne, and his brother Rosicleer, sonnes to the great Empe- rour Trebetio: with the strange loue of the beautifull and ex- Princesse Briana, and the valiant actes of other noble Prin- ces and Knightes.Now newly translated out of Spanish into our vulgar English tongue, by M.T.¶ Imprinted at Londonby Thomas East.To the right honourable the Lord Thomas HawardNOT being greatly forwarde of myne own inclination, (right honourable) but forced by the importunity of my friends to make some triall of my selfe in this exercise of trāslation, I haue aduentured vpon a peece of worke not in deede the most profitablest, as entreting of arms, nor yet altogether fruitlesse, if example may serue, as being historicall, but the while, either to be born withal for the delight, or not to the refused for the strāgenes: farther I mean not to make boaste of my trauaile, for the matter was offred not made choice off, as ther appeared lykewise little lybertie in my first yelding. The earnestnesse of my friends perswaded me that it was conuenient to lay forth my talent for encrease, or to sette my candle on a candlesticke, and the consideration of my insufficiency droue me to thinke it better for my ease, eyther quite to bury my talent, therby to auoyde the breaking of thriftlesse debates, or rather to put my candle cleane out, then that it should bewray euery vnswept corner in my house, but the opinion of my friendes iudgement preuailed aboue mine owne reason. So vpon hope to please them I first vndertooke this labour, & I haue gone thorow withall, the rather to acquaint my selfe with mine olde reading: wherto since the dispatch theroff, I haue made my friends priuie, & vpon their good liking with request thereto, I haue passed my graunt vnto thē for the pulicatiō, reseruing to my selfe the order for the dedication, so as I should thinke best either for the defence of my worke, or for some perticular merite towards me. And heerein I tooke no long leysure to finde out a sufficient personage. For the manifolde benefits receyued from your honourable parents my good

Lord and Lady; quickly eased me of that doubt, and presented your honour vnto my viewe: whome by good right I ought to loue and honour in especiall, as being of them begotten, at whose handes I haue reaped especiall benefit. The which benefit if I should not so gladly professe openly, as I willingly receiued being offred, I might well be challenged of vnkindenesse: but were I as able to make good my part, as I am not ignoraunt what may be required at my hands, I would hope not to be founde vngrateful. In the meane time this my trauaile I cōmend vnto your Lordshippe, beseeching the same, so to accept thereoff, as a simple testimony of that good will which I bere to your parēts while they liued thē being their seruāt, & now do owe vnto their ofspring after their decease, for their demerits. Vnder your honours protectiō I shal lesse fere the assalt of the enuious, & of your honours good acceptaciō I haue some hope in the mildenes of your Lordships nature, not doubting but that as your Lordshippe hath giuen no smal signification in this your noble youth of wisedome and courage to so many as knowe you, it being the only support of your auncestours lyne: so the same lykewise will maynteine your auncestours glorye & the hope of your owne vertues with affabilitie & gentlenesse, which was the proper commēdation of your parents. The almightie encreese this hope with the other vertues before named, to the good hope of your countries peace, your Princesse safetie, and your owne honour, with the ioy of your kinred & friēds, whom not a few your parents good deseruing hath assured vnto you, and of whose ernest prayers you shal not faile, to further your wel doing. Amongst them though last in worthinesse, yet with the formost in well wishing and desire of wel deseruing, your honour shall finde me.Your honours humbly most assured.Margaret TylerThou hast heere, gentle Reader, the historie of Trebatio[1]The commendacion of the story.
an Emperour in Greece: whether a true storie of him in déede, or a fained fable, I wot not, neither dyd I greatly seeke after it in y^e translation, but by me it is done into English for thy profit & delight. The chiefe matter therin contained is of exploits of wars, & the parties therin named, are especially renowmed for their magnanimitie & courage. The authors purpose appearth to be this, to animate thereby, and to set on fire the lustie courages of yoūg gentlemen, to the aduauncement of their line, by ensuing such like steps. The first tongue wherein it was penned was the Spanish, in which nation by common report, the inheritance of all warlike commendation hath to this day rested. The whole discourse in respect of the ende not vnnecessary, for the varietie & continuall shift of fresh matter very delightfull, in y^e speaches short & swéet, wise in sentence, and wary in the prouision of contrary accidents. For I take the grace thereoff to be rather in the reporters deuice then in the truth of this report, as I would that I could so well impart with thée y^e delight which my selfe findeth in reading the Spanish: but seldome is the tale carried cleane from an ethers mouth.  Such deliuery as I haue made I hope thou wilt friendly accept, y^e rather for that it is a womans work, though in a story prophane, and a matter more manlike then becōmeth my sexe. But as for y^e manlinesse of the matter, thou knowest[2]That a woman maye write of warre. y^t it is not necessary for euery trumpettour or drumslare in the warre to be a good fighter. They take wage onely to incite others though themselues haue priuy maimes, and are thereby recurelesse. So Gentle Reader if my trauaile in Englishing this Authour, may bring thée to a liking of the vertues héerein commended, and by example therof in thy princes  & countries quarrel to hazard they person & purchase good name, as for hope of well deseruing my selfe that way, I neither bend my selfe therto nor yet feare the speach of people if I be found backward. I trust euery man holds not the plow, which would y^e groūd

were tilled: & it is no sinne to taike of Robinhood though you neuer shot in his bow: Or be it that y^e attempt were bolde to intermeddle in armes, so as the auncient Amazons did, and in this story Claridiana doth, & in other stories not a fewe, yet to report of armes is not so odious but y^t it may be borne withal, not onely in you men which your selues are fighters, but in vs women, to whom the benefit in equal part apperteineth of your victories, either for that the matter is so commendable that it carrieth no discredit from the homelinesse of the speaker, or for that it is so generally knowen that it fitteth euery man to speake thereoff, or for that it iumpeth with this common feare on all partes of warre and inuasion. The inuentition, dispositiō, trimming, & what els in this story, is wholy an other mans, my part none therein but the translation, as it were onely in giuing entertainment to a stranger, before this time vnacquainted with our coūtry guise. Mary the worst perhappes is this, that amonge so many straungers as dayly come ouer, some more auncient, and[3]That a vvoman of your yeares maye vvrite in this argument. some but new set foorth, some penning matters of great weight and sadnesse in diuinitie or other studies, the profession whereof more néerely beséemeth my yeares, other some discoursing of matters more easy & ordinary in common talke, where in a gentlewoman may honestly employ her trauaile. I haue notwithstanding made countenance onely to this gentleman, whō neither his personage might sufficiently commend it selfe vnto my sexe, nor his behauiour (béeing light & souldierlike) might in good order acquaint it selfe with my years. So y^t the question now ariseth of my choice, not of my labour, wherfore I preferred this story before matter of more importance. For answere whereto gentle Reader, y^e truth is, that as y^e first motion to this kinde of labour came not frō my selfe, so was this péece of worke put vpon me by others, & they which first counsailed me to fall to worke, tooke vpon them also to be my taskemasters and ouerseers least I should be idle, and yet bicause the refusall was in my power, I must stand to answere for my easy yelding, & may not be vnprouided of

excuse, wherin if I should alledge for my selfe y^t matters of lesse worthynesse by as aged years haue bene taken in hand, & that dayly new deuises are published, in songs, sonets, enterludes, & other discourses, and yet are borne out without reproch, only to please the humour of some men: I thinck I should make no good plea therein, for besides y^t I should finde therby so many known enimies as known men haue ben authors of such idle conceits, yet would my other aduersaries be neuer the rather quieted: for they would say y^t aswel the one as the other were al naught, & though peraduenture I might pass vnknown amongst a multitude, & not be y^e only gaze or y^e od party in my il doing, yet bicause there is lesse merit of pardon if the fault be excused as cōmon, I wil not make y^t my defence which cannot help mée, & doth hinder other men. But my deféce is by example of the best, amongst which many haue dedicated their labours, some stories, some of warre, some phisick, some lawe, some as concerning gouernment, some diuine matters, vnto diuers ladies & gentlewomen. And if men may & do bestow such of their trauailes vpon gentlewomen, then may we womē read such of their works as they dedicate vnto vs, and if we may read them, why not farther wade in thē to y^e serch of a truth. And then much more why not deale by translatiō in such argumēts, especially this kinde of exercise being a matter of more héede then of déep inuention or exquisite learning, & they must néeds leaue this as confessed, y^t in their dedications they minde not only to borrow names of worthy personages, but y^e testimonies also for their further credit, which neither the one may demaund without ambition, nor y^e other graunt without ouerlightnes: if women be excluded from the view of such workes as appeare in their name, or if glory onely be sought in our common inscriptions, it mattereth not whether y^e parties be men or women, whether aliue or dead. But to retourn whatsomeuer the truth is, whether that women may not at al discourse in learning, for men lay in their claim to be sole possessioners of knowledge, or whether they may in some maner y^t is by limita-tion[∗]"tion" in catchphrase only.
or appointment in some kinde of learning, my perswasion hath bene thus, that it is all one for a woman to pen a story, as for a man to addresse his story to a woman. But amongst al my il willers, some I hope are not so straight y^t they would enforce me necessarily either not to write[4]That you maie not write of diuinitie. or to write of diuinitie. Whereas neither durst I trust mine own iudgement sufficiently, if matter of controuersy were handled, nor yet could I finde any booke in the tongue which would not bréed offence to some, but I perceiue[5]That you meant to make a common benefit of your paines  some may be rather angry to sée their Spanish delight tourned to an English pastime, they could wel alow the story in Spanish, but they may not afford it so chepe, or they would haue it proper to themselues. What Natures such men be off, I list not greatly dispute, but my meaning hath ben to make other parteners of my liking, as I doubt not gentle reader, but if it shal plese thée after[6]The vse & profit of this Spanish translation. serious matters to sport they self with this Spaniard, y^t thou shalt finde in him the iust reward of mallice & cowardise, with the good spéed of honesty & courage, béeing able to furnish thée with sufficient store of forren example to both purposes. And as in such matters which haue bene rather deuised to beguile time, then to bréede matter of sad learning, he hath euer borne away the price which could season such delights with some profitable reading, so shalt thou haue this straunger an honest man when néede serueth, & at other times, either a good companiō to driue out a wery night, or a merry jest at thy boord. And thus much as concerning this present story, that it is neither[7]The conclusion. vnsēemly for a woman to deale in, neither greatly requiring a lesse staied age then mine is. But of these two points gentle reader I thought to giue thée warning, least perhaps vnderstanding of my name & yeares, thou mightest be carried into a wrong suspect of my boldnesse and rashnesse, frō which I would gladly free my selfe by this plaine excuse, & if I may deserue thy good fauour by lyke labour, when the choice is mine owne I will haue a speciall regard of thy liking. So I wish thee well.Thine to vse,M.T.¶ CAP. I.AFter that the greate Emperour Constantine had peopled the Citie of Constantinople, with the race of the noble Citizens of Rome, & had reedisted y^e anciēt buildings founded by Pansanias king of the Parthes. Among all the Emperours which succeeded in that Empire of Greece, none seemed to haue raysed his owne name, or to haue made it so famous, as the great and mightie Emperour Trebatio. Whose worthy deedes with the valiant actes of the Knights of his time, I will report here, according as Artimidoro the Grecian hath left them written in the great volumes of his Chronicle.The story sayth thus: That if at any time Fortune, being alwaies vncerteine and variable, shewed hir selfe more friendly to the Greekes, then to all men besides: and if euer the Grecians were feared in all the worlde, it was in the time of Trebatio the sonne of Alicante, which man by right line descended from the noble and auncient blood of Molosso, the second sonne of strong Pyrrhus, and in the third discent from the great Achilles, which was slayne in the warres at Troye.This Trebatio, in the xxv. yeare of his age, reigned in Epirus, wher the sayd Pyrrhus & his auncestours had bene kings. He was strong and valiant in armes, and endowed with so many graces, that his fame in y^t time was spred ouer all the world, and that there was neither king nor Emperour but he was glad to hold him for his friend.Now it happened in his time by the death of the Emperour Theodoro, the state of the Empire to be voyde, for that Theodoro had no sonne, and the Empire was to be giuen by election: So that the Electors not fynding any whom with so good reason they might chuse for Emperour 

as the great Trebatio, as well for his great valure, as for his discēt from so noble a race. They with y^e willing & ioint assent of all the Emperials named him vnto the Empire, and brought him with great honour to Constantinople. Where, (if before, for his great same they had praised and honored him) now much more they held him déere, hauing in some part séene & knowen him. Because he was of conditions very noble, pleasant, louing to all, liberall, courteous, sufferable, pitifull, and aboue all very desirous to entertein in his court, valiant and worthy knights, whom he honoured aboue all the Princes of the earth. So that his court florished with princes & knights, as wel subiects as straungers, which much magnified his great estate, & him selfe held continuall exercise in armes with them, as being like enclined to nothing. His vertue by y^t report of such as knew him, was so rare that it was generally though none of his predecessors to haue had aduauntage ouer him, but rather he was of greater force then any one of them all. For many men were witnesses of his mightie strokes. He was called y^e great Trebatio, bicause he was viii. foote in height, & very strong timbred, so y^t without proofe of his manhood, they might therby make coniecture of his force.In his life, customes & conditions he was always so affable, and courteous, that neuer might be noted in him one little fault. Wherefore his historians say, y^t he was y^e crown of the Greeks, and the cléere mirrour of all the Princes & knights of the world. Whence also this his chronicle boroweth this title, especially hauing therein to remember the meruailous déedes of the knight of y^e Sunne with Rosicleer both sones vnto Trebatio. Since whose time, all the aduentures of the auncient & famous knights were cleane forgottē, & since whose time, neither Vlisses, of whom Homere speaketh, neither any other songs or sonets, balands or enterludes, wer heard in Greece, onely with these two knightes as they were familiarly acquainted. Of these they made great volumes, and with a thousand deuises in verse
 
they sang of their loue. Thei made no building nor paīture without some storie of them and their memorie therin declared. In such sort that you might passe by no part of all Greece where was not recited, song or painted y^e histories and noble deeds of these knights. As if no other thing but armes or loue were fitting for them.And bicause that in the time to come so noble things should not be put in obliuion, some of y^e Grecians compiled this noble Historie, to the couraging of all Nations, that shall either heare or rede this Historie.¶ The king of Hungary pretending a title to the Empire, setteth him selfe against the Emperour Trebatio. Cap. 2.IT appeareth by an auncient Greeke Chronicle, y^t the Emperour Helio, y^t third predecessor in the Empire of Trebatio had two sons, y^e eldest of the which two, y^e father being deceased, was chosē Emperour, the other was married with a Princesse inheritrix of the kingdome of Hungary, whereby he became Lord & ruler of that kingdome. The first son which was elected for Emperour departed without issue. For which cause y^e Grecians chose an other which was y^e predecessor of Theodoro. This séeing y^e secōd son of Helio which then reigned in Hungary, and iudging y^t with most reason y^e Empire was his, as gréeued with y^e election he assembled his power against y^e Grecians, thinking to be Lord ouer them by force. In the end as he was not so mightie as they, so he was vanquished and slaine before he might atteine his purpose. Yet frō that time foorth al the kings which succeded in Hungary, pretended alway y^t the right of the Empire rested in them by way of inheritaunce, and there neuer failed warres & dissentions betweene the Hungarians & the Greeks vpon this occasion.In like manner when the great Trebatio was chosen for Emperour (then reigning in Hungary y^e king Tiberio, a very strong man & of great courage, besids of more might

then all his auncestours. For he held in his subiection beside the kingdome of Hungary many other prouinces, as Holland, Zeland, Flaunders, Zweueland, Bauare, Austrich, Almaine, Alba, Denmarke, Marcomandia, Perfia, and other regions, with the which he déemed himselfe one of the mightiest kings in the world. This Tiberio knowing the election of the Emperior Trebatio, and béeinge more attached with the desire of the Empire then any of his prececessors were, (as it was to bée gotten by war) so he assembled by summons y^e greatest of estate throughout his lande, and declaring vnto them his will, hee commaunded to gather all the people they might for to inuade Greece. Besides this, to the ende his power might yet bée greater, he determined to marry his daughter vnto such a one, as would and could mainteine his quarrel. This maiden was called Briana, the most bewtifull Princesse that was to be found in all those partes, béeinge by the onely reporte of hir eccellencie, sued vnto by many worthy Princes, especailly by Prince Edward, sonne of Olyuerio king of the great Britaine.  This young knight strong ad valiant, and greatly enamored on the Princesse Briana, through the great fame of her bewtie, had before dispatched his ambassadors towards the king hir father, to request hir for wife. To the which hir Father bicause hée had already vendertooke the battaile against the Emperour Trebatio, easely condesended, vpon condition that the Prince should come into Hungary with 20000 chosen men of warre for to aide him in the presuite of his claime, against the Emperour.This, when Prince Edward venderstoode, hée had so great desire to haue the Princesse Briana, that by and by he graunted his request, and so as speadely as he might, he gathered the people that the king Tiberio required of him, and with the consent of his Father hée departed from great Britaine towarde Hungary, giuing intelligences before vnto the king Tiberio, of his comming. The

king knowing the succours which came vnto him, appointed a day when all his hoast should méet together, and finding him selfe of so great power, in the meane while vntill the Prince came, hée resolued to make a rode into Greece, sacking all the little townes he might, before that the Emperour Trebatio should perceiue it. Afterwardes if y^e Emperour Trebatio should come to succour his subiectes, then to ioyne battaile with him, as such time as the Prince should apporch, which thing he put into practise diligently. For with that power which he had, he entered into Greece forraging the countrey, taking little townes of no great force, burning and wasting so much as he might, to the intent that the people of other fenced cities stroken with feare, might abandon themselues to flight, and enféeble their forces. Howbeit king Tiberio had not passed in Greece xxx. myles, when the Emperour Trebatio hauing knowledge of it, came against him w^t an hoast of knights so valiant, that at the first alarme, the Hungarian reculed, and by the chase of his enimies was forced to retire home into the citie of Belgrado which is in Hungary. Ther he fortified himselfe, and manned the twone, vnwilling as yet to goe vnto the féelde, vntill the Prince of greate Britaine should arriue: by whose comming their powers béeing ioyned, he thought he might giue the battaile vnto y^e Emperour Trebatio. Albeit he caryed about him a mayme incurable in his body, not by any stroke lent him by his enimie, but by the onely conceit of the Emperours vertue. For he had séene the Emperous demeane him selfe more worthely then any of those which came with him, & namely in a kinsman of his, a very strong knight, whom the Emperour at one blow, as it were, deuided in two péeces. This, as it might be, made, him kéepe his chamber, bicause he himselfe confessed y^e valour of the Emperour to be aboue the report of men, notwithstanding he had heard sufficiently of the Emperours prowesse. But bicause these things are not mentioned, but to giue beginning to this

history, we run them briefly ouer, not rehearsing y^e great déeds of armes that the Emperour and his people did in besieging y^e citie, bicause we haue other matters more noble in hand, in comparison whereoff, these thinges were needlesse. The story hereoff, beings in y^e chapter following.¶ The Emperour Trebatio by the hearesay of hir beautie, was surprised with the loue of the princesse Briana. ca. 3CErteine daies the Emperour Trebatio lay at y^e sidge of Belgrado, hoping that the king Tiberio would come out to giue them battaile, for that he had greate desire to be auenged of the great harmes which he had receiued in Greece, but the king would in no wise leaue the towne, still abiding the comming of Prince Edward and his army out of England. The Emperour meruailing much at it, cōmaunded a prisoner to be brought before him, whom he had taken in the former battaile, of him he demaunded the cause why the king Tiberio held himself so close with so many good knights mewed vp in the citie, and why hée came not out to giue the battaile, with promise of life & liberty if he told trouth, otherwise y^e certeintie of most cru- death. The prisoner thus placed before y^e Empereur, what with feare of death, and hope of libertie, durst not declare other thē y^e truth, & therfore thus made answere vnto him.[1]Prisoners oration. "Know you mightie Emperour, that when the king of Hungary my master, first tooke vpon him the entry into Greece, he would not haue done it, (although he hath so mightie an hoast as is séene) but in hope y^t before he should be espied and met withall, there should come to his helpe Prince Edward, sonne to the king of great Britaine, which 20000. knights. This number was promised vpon condition that the prince should haue the kings daughter, the princeffe Briana to wife, which princesse I beléeue is the fayrest maide in all the world, and by such fame y^e prince is become enamored of hir, so as we héere that he is already departed from greate Britaine with the number

appointed, & shal take landing very soone in this countrey, the king Tiberioabideth his comming, & is determined to giue the onset, as soone as their forces shal be vnited.Thus sayd the prysoner, but the Emperour minding to knowe more of the matter, demaunded of him where the Princesse Briana remayned, and of what age shee myght be. The prinsoner aunswered him. My Lord, she is with the Quéene Augusta hir Mother in the monastary of the ryuer which is néere to Buda, a pleasant and delectable house, wherin none are lodged but Nonnes, & the Queenes gentlewomen. The princesse is of y^e age of xiiij. years, & be you assured that so many as shal sée hir, wil iudge hir rather a goddesse then a woman, so much hir beautie doth excell all the gentlewomen of the world. Now so soone as y^e prince shall land, he will straight waies take his iourney towards the monastery of y^e riuer, bicause it is so appointed by the king hir father. The king him selfe will not be there, bicause he will not be absent in such a busy time from the citie." When the prisoner had thus sayde, the Emperour Trebatio cōmaunded him to be set frée without speaking other thing to his people, but with a sorowfull & troubled countenaunce, he withdrew himselfe into a secret chamber of his Imperiall tent. Where tossing in his conceit diuers & sundry fancies, he endured a wilful imprisonment, without any baile or maynprise. "Thus that force, which neither by tilt, turney, nor barriers, neither by speare nor swoord, neither by mallice of the enimy, nor pride of the mightie, might at any times be subdued, was nowe vanquished by y^e onely hearesay of a gentlewomans commendation. Nay y^e valiant heart which he held forcible inough against all the world, failed in his own defence against a delicate damzel whom he had nauer séene. What force is it y^t may repulse this euil, sith y^t with such flattering closes, it ouerthroweth so many noble hearts and strong bodies." But to retourne, the Emperour Trebatio so much burned in loue with the Princesse Briana, that already he hath

forgottē the damage receiued in his countrey, his trauaile out of his countrey with a huge army, the consuming of his treasure for to wreake his anger on the king Tiberio, onely he deuised vpon this, howe to giue remedie vnto his amorous passion. For as y^e fire was great which enflamed him, so was the remedy by all semblaunce farre from him. Bicause that on y^e one part he was hindred by the enmitie betwéene him and hir father, so that he durst not require hir for wife, and on the other side she was already promised to the Prince of greate Britaine, who had put himselfe on his iourney for y^e atteining of hir person, so that likewise y^e king could not take hir from him to giue vnto his enimy. These things bred such griefe vnto y^e Emperour as y^t he hoped for nothing, but to dye. And so tourning & ouertourning in his thought a thousand sort of remedies, w^tout finding any which might satisfie him, he conuaied him selfe into his most secret tent, & ther remained .iii daies, not suffering any of his people to haue accesse vnto him or speach w^t him, except some squires seruitors, from whō likewise he would willingly haue exempted himself, but that he would not die so desperately. Those of the camp which sawe the sodeine chaunge & alternation in the Emperour, as they new not the cause of it, so were they much abashed and carefull to know what it might bée.  Some immagined that the delay of the warre, and the comming of prince Edward were the occasions of his trouble, and so hoping that he should well ouercome that griefe shortly, they left him to his rest, vntill he had resolued vpon the pursuite of this which followeth in the next Chapter.¶ Prince Edward entereth into Belgrado: The Emperous bethincketh himselfe of his remedie. Cap. 4.FOure daies after y^t the Emperous Trebatio was thus wounded with the loue of the Princesse Briana, Prince Edward w^t xx.M. entered into the citie of Belgrado, where he was welcomed by the king who had great desire to 

see him, for he thought not only to depart with y^e citie, but also to adde thervnto a great part of y^e empire of Greece. So soone as these newes wer spred in the enimies campe, the emperour was cast into greater melancholy, as by the shortnes of time not being able to finde an issue for his late deuise, only this he thought, y^t for to assure his vncerteine hope (if ther might be any) he had none other way then to cut of prince Edwards enterprise, and so by shortning his life, better & more easely to compasse y^e obteining of y^e princes. Upon this resolution he made to call into his tent .xii. knights, y^e most valiant & worthiest of all his hoast, among whom one was Alceo, father of Rodomarte, prince of Sardinia, of whom ther is made great account in this history: the second was Alpineo L. of y^e Iland Lemnos: the third was called Alfonte L. of y^e Iland Sicile: the iiii. was called Alcino king of Thrace: y^e fifte, Liberio L. of Nicroponte: y^e sixt Boristhines whose son was Rodopheo prince of Rhodes: y^e seuenth Dardante prince of Dalmatia: y^e eight Melides L. of Ithaca wher Vlysses reigned king: y^e ix. Argante L. of Pathmos: y^e x. Arimont L. of y^e Ilands Cyclades: y^e xi. Artedoro prince of Candia: y^e xii. & last Nicoleonte L. wardē of y^e streights wher Corinth stood. All knights of great account, young & very strong for to vndertake any enterprise, all subiects vnto the emperour, & all welbeloued of him, bscause he was priuie vnto their great vertues. Now when y^e emperour saw all these knights in presence, with some shamefastnes which y^e weight of y^e matter caused, he reueled to them wholy his gréefe, giuing thē to vnderstād withall; y^t vnles he had some help his life wer spilt. Among all y^e best which he had found, he reckned specially vpon one, which was, y^t secretly they shold auoyd the campe & follow him. The knights hauing great desire to serue him, & esteming themselues happy that he would communicate with them part of his minde, they fréely offered vnto him their persons for y^e accomplishing of that which he should commmaund them, & they all agreed to

depart with him in such order as he had deuised. Then y^e emperour made to cal before him y^e king of Boheme, which was his vnckle, a very wise and expert man in armes, to whom he declared, "y^t he had vrgent occasion to be absent a while from his army, y^e circumstances wherof saith he, you shall further know at our returne, in y^e meane time, I commend vnto you y^e charge of y^e warre, & for your greater credite with y^e people I deliuer vnto your hands the Imperiall scepter." The king meruailing at this y^t the Emperour did, without more demaunding of him whether or wherabout he would go, accepted y^e charge & promised therein to employ his trauaile. Well, y^e night approching with the houre agréed vpon, y^e emperour & the xii. knights, armed at all points with rich & costly armour and with Hungarian bases, secretly left y^e campe without being heard or knowen of their enimies, wherin they trauayled all night vntil the day appeared, then they alighted to rest their horses, and fed vpon such victuals, as thei had brought with them: after taking again their horses, they posted on their iourney till they wer in the myd way, between Buda and Belgrado, which way prince Edward of force must haue passed when he should go to y^e monasterie of y^e riuer. Ther in a thicke wood somewhat aside out of y^e way, they put them selues hauing prouision & furniture of all things necessary, wher they remained very close: vntill y^e Fortune friendly to y^e emperour & enimie to y^e prince, gaue y^e prince into y^e emperours hāds, which shalbe she wed in y^e chap. folowing.Prince Edward ryding towards the Monasterie of the riuer, was by the Emperour Trebatio encountred & slayne. Cap. 5.WHen prince Edward had once set footing in Belgrado, he had great desire to sée the princes, so y^t the third day after his comming, he would needs depart towards y^e monasterie of y^e riuer. The king Tiberio vnderstāding his desire (albeit he him selfe might not accōpany him, yet) he set him on his way thetherward, (only to haue his aide & assistaūce in y^e battaile) w^t foure aged knights in his company, being best known by y^e Q. & the princes. These shold
be in y^e princes retinue, & other xif. knights mo which he had brought out of his coūtry, & by these y^e king sent letters to y^e Q. & the princes Briana, y^e contents wherof wer, y^t the prince might spedely be betrothed vnto hir, but more company would he not send therby to haue the mach kept secret till the war which he held with the emperour wer finisht. For this matter was husht no man almost being priuie vnto it, yet y^e prisoner which bewrayed it vnto the emperour, had vnderstanding of it by meanes of the kings seruice. In this tune the Q. & hir daughter hauing intelligence of the princes comming, attended his comming in the monasterie with preparation for his enterteinment. Prince Edward departing frō y^e king one night y^e most couertly y^t he might, went out of y^e citie with his owne xii. knights, & foure of y^e kings: with these he tooke his way a whole night & a day withall y^t hast he might, to ende the great desire he had to sée y^e beautifull princes. This way albeit short, yet it semed long vnto him, as being ignorāt of y^e sower sauce & wofull wedding which was in prouiding. "O mariage, y^e slender & weake foundation of worldly things, how is it not onely regarded by men but highly reuerenced: how seldome was it euer stedfast, and how many thousands hath it beguyled. (I meane not the base and common people, but euen kinges and Emperours. O how many impediments be therin left to hinder vs from enioying it: O what a common thing is it do die. & how many euer saw happie ende in it? How ioyful & pleasāt was to Paris y^e desired match of Helena, & how sorrowfull & lamentable was the end, not onely to him but to his parents & brethren & the greatest part of all Asia? For not only in Greece, but in all y^e out Ilands therabouts was bewept his bitter bridall. With how great care & diligence do men hasten on y^e causes of their care, occasions of their heauines, means of their paines, & matter for their griefe, and do not content themselues with the continuall affliction whrein fortune schooleth them? but by new meanes they inuente newe matters of daunger whiche cros-

seth thē at euery step, they frame new causes, & as it wer, forge vnto themselues sharp spurs to prick foreward this wofol life, wher they thinke to finde pleasure & rest, there they finde for their losse trauaile, & trouble for the death which they would fly frō. To escape either nipping coldes, or scalding heat, this only one remedy they haue to climbe vp vnto y^e mountains, wher yet y^e winde hath most force, & y^e sun doth soonest parch: aboue all this hath not y^e vnsatiable couetousnes of man broken through y^e sturdy waues of the sea, & cut out new passages on y^e moūtaines? But why do we cōplaine on Fortune, do not we bend hir armes to fight with vs, do not we maintain hir weapōs which peraduenture lighteth on our own necks. As for example if Paris had not made a way through y^e déepe waues of y^e sea Agean (which the gods had placed as a peaceable bound betwene Europe & Asia) & if he had not sought Greece, sith Asia was large enough to haue found a fair wife in, & (so it may be) much more honest then Helene was, then the Achians had not transported thēselues into Asia, to destroy Troy. And tourning againe to our matter, prince Edward might haue sought him a wife in his own coūtrey or more néere home, of whole beautie his own eies might haue ben witnesses, and not haue sought hir in a straunge land by y^e onely brute of a running tale, especailly vpon so hard & sore conditions as to bring his owne person & people to the war. Whosoeyer coms to séeke pleasure and delight for his youth, let him take that he findes, and think it not straunge, bicause that vnkinde Fortune hath vsed the like vnto others." The prince then being on his way, two of y^e kings knights were dispatched before by some secreate by wayes very well knowne vnto them to aduertise y^e Quéene and princesse of y^e approaching of y^e prince. These ii. held on their way, not aseryed by the ambush, but so soone as y^e prince w^t this knights had entered in the thicket, they wer presētly discouered by y^e Emperour who was already armed w^t his rich armor & moūted vpō a strōg & light horse

The Emperour taking a great speare in his hande very sharpe, and well steeled for the purpose, went alone aside out of the woode with a softe pace, to encounter with the Prince and his knights, and beeing come right before them, sayed vnto them. "Knowe you knights that this passage is forbidden you, except you leaue your shields and your names in them. For that a ladie whom I honour and serue hath commanded me to doe it, whose loue I could not other wise obteine." The Prince Edward was by nature very stoute, and by inclination giuen to somewhat lesse modestie in his talke then behoued suche a Prince, howbeit for this and other faultes he was a very valiaunt and strong knight, such a one as neither in great Britaine, neither in the kingdome of Hungary, was thought to haue his peere.  But as he vnderstoode the demaunde of the knight, very wroth he aunswered him. "By God knight, if the king Tiberio were as certeine of the victorie against the Emperour Trebatio, as I hope to chastise thy follie, then the Prince of England should not neede to come from so farre a countrey to giue him helpe. Take thou quickly that part of the fielde as shall seeme good vnto thee, and with one onely choise thou shalt see howe deere and bitter thy loue hath bene vnto thee."As the Prince hath sayd this, and had pronounced with his owne mouth, that cruell doome, not well foreseeinge his owne fall, he tooke a great speare frō one of his knights and broched his horse with the spurres to meete the Emperour. (This he did, not for that his knights woulde not haue put themselues in the aduenture before him, euery man claiming to be first, but for that no reason suffices him. For his stoutnesse & his vnmeasurable pride, made him forget the force of his enimie, and yet his enimie stoode before him so great and so bigge made, that he seemed to be a gyant.) But this Princes aduerse fortune and unhappie destinies would him to be the formost, so that the mightie Trebatio knowe it, as well by the riches of

his armour as by the talke which had passed betwéen him & his knightes, and béeing very glad to sée him in the firste which he met, he sayd vnto himselfe, O that my speare were nowe greater and stronger and the head forged by Vulcan, that it might not stay in y^e armour of this knight, for that according as I see him great & stronge, so I feare hée will escape my handes, and then my trauaile shall be all in vaine. Thus as he sayde, they by and by did put both their speares in their restes, and giuing either horse hys bridle, they ranne together with such fury, that they made the earth to tremble, and yet the lightnesse of their horses was such, that it semed the grasse yelded not vnder their feete.  The Prince hit the Emperour in the middest of the shéelde, and pearcing farther left the head remaining in the fine and well steeled armour, whereby the staffe broken in many shiuers made a great whisteling in the ayre. But the Emperours stroke was muche more fell, for he leuelled it with such force that it entred not onely into the shéeld and strong armour of the Prince, but passed through vnto his amerous heart all bedewed with bloud a whole armes length.Then the Prince fel dead executing the sentence which he had giuen in these wordes, that that loue shoulde bée very deere & bitter. When his people sawe him stretched vpon the grounde, there might no sorowe be compared vnto theirs, and as raging madde they ranne altogether vppon the Emperour thinckinge to put in practise their deadly anger vpon his carcase. Some with speares and other with swoords strake hym on all partes with great rage and hast, so that if his armour had not bene verie good, in short space they had hewed it in peeces. But that most valiant Greke, no lesse strong then any of his auncetors, bearing his fine and sharp swoord, tourned himselfe among them in such manner, that he shethed it in their bodies. The first whom he met he cleaued vnto the eyes, the seconds arme he cut of by the elbow, & being sore woun-

ded he ouerthrewe the third at an other blowe, neither straied he here, but in his rage, he dealt blows and wounded many, whiche for feare accounting him rather a diuell of hell than a knight, put themselues to flight. Albeit, they might haue recouered some courage in y^t they wer many & chosen knights, alwaies against one knight onely. But the reason was for that at this time the Emperours knightes shewed themselues out of the woode. So that indéede by the great manhood of their Lord they found none left on liue saue two knights of y^e king which wer knowen by their Hungarian bases. Those the Emperour commaunded to be kept carefully for y^e thing before touched. This béeing done, the knights and other footmen which the Emperour had brought with him to guid his cariage tooke all y^e dead bodies vpon their horses w^tout leauing any thing which was theirs, & altogether they caried thē into y^e think of y^e wood, frō whence they before came out, ther in y^e thickest thereoff, they made a great pit, into y^e which they threw y^e prince & the knights saue y^e English bases, & y^e kings letters which were néedful for his purpose. They couered thē with earth in such sort, that ther was neuer memory of them. At the time that the Prince was entered, the Emperour béeing of conditions pitiful, felt so great dolor in his heart y^t the teares issued abundantly from his eyes, ruing the losse of so great a Prince slaine out of his own country in the bewtie of his age, when also yelding a great sigh which sigh séemed to haue come from y^e bottome of his heart, he sad with a troubled & low voice in this wise."O vnhappie and vnfortunate Prince, God knoweth how sorowful and grieuous thy death is to mée, and how faine I would haue giuen remedy in some other manner to that I most deired, and although thou wast mine enemie and come in fauour of y^e kinge Tiberio to take from me my land & high estate, yet woulde I not haue bene so cruel an enimie vnto thée, but y^e entire loue of the princesse Briana draue me more therto, then mine owne enmitie,

Nowe I with that by some other meanes I might haue bene reeued, and not to haue bought my life by thy losse. But as loue is tirannous, so meruaile not though he want pitie towards thee, which could not otherwise purchase it to himselfe: Pardon me therefore, O mightie and worthy prince, & iudge if thou wert aliue what thou wouldest doe if by my death thou mightest finde remedie of thy loue." The Emperours knights which heard these words, and sawe the teares trickling downe his manly cheekes, perceived well howe much the death of the Prince disquieted him and they sayd amongst themselues, that by good right the Emperour deserued the prayse of the most noble and worthy Prince of the worlde. But hauing made an ende, the Emperour caused to be brought before him the two knightes belonging vnto Tiberio. These two were very fearefull of the death, seeing the thinges which were already done and especially when they knewe him to be the Emperour Trebatio, whom they helde as their mortall enimie. Nowe when they came before him, the Emperour sayd to them. If you will doe that whiche I commande you, and keep secreate that which I tell you, I will not onely pardon you the death which I haue giuen to your felowes, but also I will bring you with me vnto mine Empire, where you shall be very well contented." The knightes better satisfied then they were, bicause he promised them life, before not hoping but the death, with good will they yelded thmselues to doe all that hee would, withall, swearing into his emperiall handes their faith and obeisaunce. Then sayde the Emperour, "that which I would haue you doe is this, I haue great desire to haue the Princesse Briana for wife, and this maye not be done, except I goe in the name of Prince Edward, to ensure my selfe with hir in the monastery of the riuer, for the which it is necesiary that you two being knowen of the Queene and the Princesse, shoulde goe in my companie, and say that I am Prince Edward. Nowe sirs

discouer not my secreat to any person, vntil y^t you be licensed therevnto by me, and in so dooing, you shall do naught either against your Lord or kingdome, sith in this bargaine the princesse loseth not, and the king with all hys subiectes winne perpetually, for that by this meane, the great wars and contentious begun, shall take ende."After that the Emperour had said these and other things, whereby the knights vnderstoode his will, it grieued them not a whit of this talke, but they were rather ioyous, weying the benefit which the king, the kingdome, the princesse Briana, and all his should reape thereby, and especially the Princesse, by obteining to husband the moste noble and worthy Prince of all christendome, as well for his person as for his estate, and so with good will they submitted themselues to doe him pleasure and what els he cōmaunded them. With this the Emperour and his knightes tooke the letters which were directed to the Queene and the princesse, and with more hope to achiue their enquest, they put on the English bases, which made them séeme English men, then taking their way towarde the monastery of the ryuer. In the way the kings knightes tolde the Emperour howe two of their felowes were gone before to gyue notice vnto the Princesse of Prince Edwards comming, and that therefore it were good to goe well aduised, for they should meete them by the way. The Emperour alowed their aduice, and charged his people vntill they approched néere them not to disclose themselues, least they retiring, their secreats might be layd open. Now fortune iumped so euen with the Emperour, as that al things succeded on his side, vntill the accomplishment of his desire, which shall be recited in the Chapter following.¶ The Emperour Trebatio was receiued at the monastarie by the Archbishop of Belgrado, and there betrothed by the name of Prince Edward. Cap. 6.THe Emperour with his knightes departed from the woode, there the vnfortunate Prince was slaine, and tooke their way towards othe citie of Buda, vntil they came within vf. miles of the monastery, where they saw a farre the two other knightes which had retourned to bringe the Prince on his way, when their fellowes had espyed them, they tolde it to the Emperour, vpon this the Emperour commaunded his knights to kepe together, least they should be knowne, and so they kept on till they met.  The other two seeing the English bases, thought him to bée y^e prince of England with his knights. But y^e Emperours knightes as soone as these were within their reach laide holde on their bridels, and with courteous woordes stayed them vntill the other two knightes of the kings had talked with them.  These two declared vnto the other that which had happened betwéen prince Edward & the Emperour Trebatio, & in y^e end made plaine the meaning of the Emperour, both praying them to kéepe it secreate, and threatening them with death if they did otherwyse. No doubt they wondred at that which chaunced, but what the Emperour would that they promised him, & were nothing repentaunt of their exchaunge.The Emperour béeing asserteined of their faith, went with them towards the monastery of the riuer, whervnto béeing come, they founde not in the monasterie but the Quéene, the Princesse and other gentlewomen béeinge seruitors to attend vpon them, and the Archbishoppe of Belgrado which there taryed for to ensure them. This Archbishop receiued the Emperour at the gate, & thincking him assuredly to be the Prince of England, conducted him with his knightes, where the Quéene & the Princesse were in the company of beautifull and discreate Ladies, abiding his comming. When they had saluted each other, and that the Emperour had taken a full view of the princesse, he was greatly abashed to sée her beautie, for he could not be perswaded that so great comlinesse had bene in He-lene, although déerely bought by his auncestors, hée iudged it more heauenly or angelicall, then humaine or earthly, besides she was of a goodly stature excelling the other gentlewomen in height a span. The Princesse when she sawe the Emperour before hir, shée iudged him to bee the goodliest knight that might be in the world, which his beautiful face and pleasant countenaunce shewed especially. When thus by the eies each of them were indifferently satisfied, the Emperour would haue kissed the hand of the Quéene Augusta, but she with great good will embraced him. By and by, tourning himselfe againe towardes the Princesse, hée tooke hir by the hand, and sayde in effect thus much."The fame of your great beautie, excellent Princesse, hath in such sort passed through the world, that the onely report thereof hath forced the prince of England to leaue his naturall kingdome and soile, to come and serue you in this countrey, and to beholde with his owne eies that whiche his eares woulde scarcely beléeue. God hath made me so fortunate that I haue obteined the good will of the king your father, and of the Quéene your mother for to haue you to wife. Onely nowe I want the consent of your part, which the king by his letters praieth you to giue vnto me, & I for the desire that I haue to bée yours, beséech you not denie it me, for with it I maye account my selfe the happiest knight of all the world." And with these wordes, kissing the kings letters he deliuered it into hir handes, which the Princesse receiuing with a graue & sober countenaunce, and after taking it to y^e Archbishop for to read, the meane time made aunswere softly, on this wise."I would to God most worthy Prince, that I were such a one as with reason might deserue some part of y^e paines which you haue taken onely to sée me, or that I might in some little respsect recompence the great pleasure you haue done to me, & to al this kingdome in cōming, to succour vs

with your great force and power, but sith desert doth want so much in me, I will accomlish that which the duetie of obedience vnto the king my father forceth me vnto, for y^t I must subiect my wil vnto his cōmaundement, yet I so comsider of this your offer & request, as that from this time I will dare to compare with you in like happinesse.While these wordes were in speaking, the Archbishoppe began to reade the kinges letters, wherein onely was conteined his consent wtih the desire of dispatch, that presently vpon the princesse comming they should be married. The Archbishop with both their consents taking their handes, married them with all the ceremonies and wordes which the Church ordeineth. After this the Emperour embraced the faire Princes, and with vnspeakeable gladnesse kissed hir on the white and red chéekes, and from thence brought hir into a gorgeous chamber, where they draue foorth the rest of the day with a very amorous and delectable talke, which so much the more set his loue on fire, as he procéeded farther in his pleasant daliaunce. Albeit ere night the most puissant Emperour was not altogether quieted in his thought, for feare least some one which knewe the Prince might haue bewrayed them, at length béeing certeine that none in the monastery had séene either the one or the other, but onely the kinges .iiij. knightes, and his owne men which kept that matter close ineugh, when the houre of supper approched, hee supped with some pleasure, and so helde on a greate parte of the night till it was time to take his reste. Then the Emperour was ledde to one side of the monasterie, wherein there was a riche and stately lodginge, where he lengthened the night with many fancies, not hauinge as yet reached into the very depth of his enterprise, albeit, it stilled a little with y^t which already had happened. The bautiful princesse after leaue taken of y^e Emperour, accompanied y^e Quéene hir mother. Bicause vntil y^e war was ended betweene y^e king hir father & the emperour, she was

desirous to kéepe hir selfe vnknownen, and so the kinge, hir father, and the Queene hir mother had commaunded, least if ought should happen anusse to the prince in these battailes, the princesse should haue remained both a maiden and a widowe, this deuise little auayled, as shal be manifested in the sequele.¶ The Emperour Trebatio driueth in his conceit, the order how to consummate the marriage, which in the end he bringeth to passe accordingly. Cap. 7THE Emperour Trebatio remained .iij. dayes in the monastery of the ryuer, not hauing oportunitie to talke with the Princesse alone, bicause she was not willing to giue consent to his desire, vntil the warre with the emperour should be finished. This inconueniencie troubled his thought & increased his melancholy, as nothing more for that the terme which the king had set for his retourne was all ready expired, and beeing afraide least the kinge would send for him, whereby his fault should be discouered, without giuing remedy to that which had bene the originall of his griefe, in such wise he was tormented that he could neither sléepe nor eate. And in his imagination he did naught els but gase on the princesse, expecting time when he might alay the heate of his amorous passion. But whether it were Fortune, or the will of God, it fell so out that there was begotten betwéene them the fruite of their desire. For one morning walking in his chamber, he espied out of a windowe the Princesse alone in hir night gowne, going towards a fresh and pleasant gaudein butting vpon his lodging, (the gardein before he had not séene). Into this gardeine entered none but the Princesse and hir gentlewomen. As hée sawe so good and prosperous a time, the most ioyfull man that euer was, hee went towardes the pleasaunt gardeine, and findinge no entery but by the chamber of the Princesse, the doore, where-

of was shutte, hée tooke two of those speares which his knightes had brought, and rearing them vp against the wall with the blunt ende vpwards, (as he was very nimble) he lifted himselfe vpon them lightly, and easely slidde downe betwixt them into the gardeine, without béeinge seene of any, especially not of the Princesse, who was vnwitting of such a leape.The Princesse was nigh a fountaine wel set about with Roses and Jessamines, kembing & dressing of hir yeolow haire. Nowe when she sawe hir selfe thus sodeinly taken by the Emperour, with a fearefull starte shée rose from whence she was, and gentely smiling as somewhat ouertaken with shamefastnesse, she beshrowed him in this sort. "Assuredly my Lord, néedes must the hurt bee greate which you haue susteined by your leape, and great is the iniury which the gardeine hath receiued by your entery, bicause that in it none haue come, but either my selfe, or my gentlewomen: for whose solace it was first plotted out. For this cause God hath shewed mée such fauoure, aunswered the Emperour, bicause I haue lodged my heart in your excellent beautie, and well maye the body lawefully enter where the heart is harboured. Let not therefore my entrie, good madame, séeme straunge vnto you, sith that neither houre nor moment I may departe from you. And if this my rudenesse hath procured you any paine, by the fréedome which you haue giuen me my heart shal make excuse vnto your beautie, vnder whose safe conduct without demaund of leaue, my body hath entered." The good Emperour hauinge thus sayd, embraced & kised hir, & not leauing any leasure of reply, made hir to sit down by him néere vnto the well. This place was so hedged & compassed about with odoriferous Roses & swéet smelling Jessamines, y^t they might not be perceyued by any. And y^e gentle mourmure that the running water made vppon the pibble stones, agréeing with the delicate layes which diuerse birdes made vppon the gréene boughes, encreased so

much the longing desire of the Emperour, that castinge howe to winne the fauour of his lady, already his tounge failed to speake, and his hearing to receiue that which she spake. She then all trembled, as knowing his purpose, & through feare greatly desired to haue shunned that place, but the Emperour caught hir betéene his armes, and with such haste to ende his suite left hir vnfurnished of hir aunswere.At that time as the burning beames of the Sunne began with his golden rayes to looke through the thicke Jessamines, al the fortunate aspectes intermedling their forces, at that time, by the grace of the Almightie, were begotten these two noble children, The Knight of the Sunne, and Rosicleer. The beames of whole knightly déeds so shined thorugh the world, as that the worthy prowesse of their prodecessors were thereby eclipsed.This was the Plaudite of his passion, and the beautiful princesse now became a wife somewhat against hir will, but when she sawe no remedy to that which was past, she comforted hir selfe in that he was hir lawful husband, and therefore she pardoned him his boldnesse in troubling hir. These two louers shortened the time with good agréement, vntill the Emperour at his departure tooke his leaue of hir to mounte vp the way hee came, and to retourne into his lodging. The princesse remained alone in the gardeine, vntill hir gentlewomen came for hir to dinner.After this, yet the Emperour soiourned ther thrée daies, at the ende whereoff, fearing the kinges ielousie ouer his tarrying, and the euent of his sending for, hee tooke hys leaue of the Quéene and the Princesse, not without the courtesie of many teares on each parte, and especially of the Princesse whom he left very dolefull, albeit sadder woulde shée haue bene, if she had foreséene the longe time of his absence.The Emperour Trebatio pursuing those which had stolen his Lady, lefte all his knights and tooke an other way. Cap. 8THe Emperour Trebatio thus hauing departed from the monastery of the riuer, became very sorowfull in his heart, with the leauing of the Princesse Briana, for that y^e fire which enflamed him after he had knowen hir, was greater than y^e affection which he bare to hir before by the hearing of hir beautie, and that which caused his most griefe, was that he knew not how either to retourne speadely vnto hir, or to salue that sore which he had already chaffed. He thought in himselfe, that if hee made peace with the king Tiberio letting him vnderstand of the matter, the king would not accept of it, either for the great enmitie which was betwixt them, or for the bond wherein he was bound to the Prince of great Britaine. And therefore it would be a thing neither reasonable, or agreeing with his honour, in lieu of the princes paines which hee had taken to come form his countrey accompanied with so great a number of knightes to serue him, and in regard of the death which he there receiued in his seruice, nowe to become a friend to his foe, and to giue his daughter before espoused to the Prince, vnto the deadlyest foe which the Prince had, debating these and other thinges in his minde about the time that they had got ouer their heads the thicke woode wherein they had bene before, nowe to the ende not to tyre their horses, they lighted downe, vnbridled their horses, and tourned them to grasse. They themselues féeding on such victualls as they had brought with them, although the meat whereon the Emperours stomach tyred, was most of all sobs and sighes, as receiuing no pleasure in the absence of y^e princesse. Now the night assailed them, and hauing not in them to make resistaunce, they yelded their forces, euery one taking hys rest where it liked them best. But y^e Emperour somwhat a

parte from the reste, casting himselfe vppon the gréne grasse, & staying his back against a trée, he there remained more thē two houres broad awake staring at y^e clearanesse of y^e ayre, & the brightnesse of the stars, when his thoughts renued, and the amorous passion, if before not cleane buried now reuiued a fresh by y^e solitarines of his conceipt: at length his cares, y^e wearinesse of his way, and the swéet noise of y^e pleasaunt leaues through the hissing of y^e winde, brought him in a gentle slomber: wherin he had scarcely bene a halfe houre but that his fancie presented to him againe his Lady Briana. He dreamed that she was taken by sorce of two Giants, the most fierce & strong that euer he had séene in all his life, and that she séeing him, cried for helpe. Through y^e griefe wherof he awaked very much afrighted: and in deede this dreame proued no game vnto him, for by and by he heard a great noyse neere vnto him, & listening wher it might be, he beheld a faire chariot drawen w^t iiij. horses, & in y^e top of it two great burning torches set in siluer candlesticks, by the light whereof he saw a Lady in the chariot clothed with rich & princely robes, and resembling so much the Princesse Briana, that he verely beleued it was she. The gentlewoman leaning on hir elbow, and casting downe hir countenaunce, passed on stil sighing, as one enduring some great force & torment. The Emperour prying about to sée who were the guides of the chariot perceiued that she was caried away by two strong and huge Gyants, with great battell axes in their hands, being on foote at the fore ende of the chariot. These two had so fell and cruel looks, that they would haue daunted the courage of any many which should haue beheld them. But the Emperour assured in his thought, that this was the Pricesse, with great anger start vp, and not remembring to call any of his knights, with his sword he paced towards the Gyaunts, where without either good euen or good morrow, he lent the first whom he approched vnto such a stroke, that the Gyaunt would haue morgaged his

part in the Lady, to haue made sufficient paiment of that blowe, for lifting vp his battell axe to receiue the blowe, the sword cut it into the myddest of the helme, and from thence gliding downe vpon his armour hewed it into many peeces. Then y^e other Giant hastening to smite the emperour, layde at his head with mayne foce, but the Emperour wardid it on his sheelde, in which the Gyants battell are stacke so fast, that he might no more drawe it out, vntill the emperour strake him on the right arme, that he made him forgoe his holde. The two Gyants thus being left weponles, with much lightnesse, more then was liekly for their bignesse, leapt into the chariot, whereby the Emperour had no time to bestowe an other blowe on them. Then a dwarfe being in the one ende of the chariot, lasht foorth the horses, so that they ranne with such swiftnes as if they had flyne. With this noise the knights awaked, and with their swordes in their handes came to learne what it should be, in the ende much abashed to see their Lord in such a heat, as they demaunded of him what befell, he was so troubled in his heart, the Princesse thus being ledde away, that he made them no aunswere, but taking his horse, he commaūded them to folow him. The Emperour spurred his horse with such furie, that he made him to runne as fast, as the swallowe flyeth in the ayre. It could not be that the palfrayes which drew the chariot were horses, bicause his horse was one of the best & most precious in the world, & his Lord hauing desire to ouertake the Princesse made him gallop more then an indifferent pace, but the other were sprightes of the ayre, and infernall furies I thincke, forced by Arte Magicke both to fly and runne. Yet the Emperour folowed the chase, without loosing the sighte of them, although it was all in vayne. The knightes which remayned in the wood, being loth to be farre behind their Lorde, went to catche their horses, but were it that naturally they feared the Gyants, or that the wicked sprites had bewitched them, they all 

brake out of that place, and strayed héere and there, soe that the knightes spente more than two hourse ere they might take them. By this the Emperour was so farre from his knightes with the hast he made, that they knew not what waye to take, and in déede it was not possible for them to get within y^e sight of him, albeit they had held on y^e beaten way, which they thought that the Emperour had taken. They rode one waye and the Emperour belyke pasied an other way, for they neuer met, but the emperour pursued so lōg vntil, in y^e ende he came to y^e brinke of the riuer Danubia, there where it deuideth it selfe into fiue armes, at the shore wherof there was a goodly and tall shippe, as the Emperour might well see, being a bow shotte behind the Gyants. In this they put the chariotte & withal hoysed their sailes, & through y^e middle arme sailed with good spéede. This outraged y^e Emperour so that with spurring he caused his horse to fall downe dead vnder him. Being thus left on foote, notwithstanding he dispayred not, but helde on to that place from whence the chariot was taken, where he carefully lookt about him to see if peraduenture on the one side or on the other, hee might trace out a way to followe: so loathe he was to loose the sighte of it. But as all this was deuised by enchauntment, so lykewise it happened him to see a little shippe sayling in the riuer with greate swiftnesse: in the which there sate an olde man with a white bearde, by his countenaunce seeming to be a very honest man. To him y^e emperour called with a loude voyce, desiring him to take towardes the shore. The olde man which had the same thinge in charge, incontinently steered towardes him, and asked what he woulde haue. "That which I would haue quoth the emperour, is to be conuayed in thy ship, to that other ship which rideth before vs. For they haue in it stollen from me the thing which I loue best in all the worlde. This paines, if thou wilt take for me, I wyll so well contente thee, as thouh shalte thincke thy

trauaile well employed. Assuredly sayed the old man, I am content to doe it, bicause your courtesie induceth me to a greater hope of your merit." Saying this he guided his ship so néere the shore, that the emperour leaped vp into it, an being on the hatches, tourning him selfe to the olde man to geue him thancks, the olde man vanished away: and the Emperour neuer sawe him after. The shippe kept the same course that it began with, and the Emperour was much astonished at it, y^e rather for that he wist no man els aboord to rule y^e ship, not knowīg what els to say or thinck of this great wonder, he thē beséeched God so to direct his viage y^t he might yet obtein his lady: for he verly déemed hir to be Briana which was in y^e chariot. In this order being stil w^tin sight of y^e former shyp, & not staryīg frō y^e way which he had kept, the Emperour stayled thrée dayes and thrée nightes in the ryuer without any lacke of sufficient foode. By reason of thei trauell and thought, the meate which he eate was no more then would suffice nature. In the forth day by morning the ship with the chariot was driuen into the great and large Sea, called Pontus Euxinus, through the which he yet sayled within the view of the other, vntill the forewarder shippe ariued in a fayre and delectable Ilande, where the chariot tooke landing. Halfe an houre after the emperours shippe rushed on the shore with such force that the shippe rent into péeces, and with the violence of the rush threw the Emperour vppon the bancke flatlings on his backe, where after he had stretched himselfe, he began againe to trauaile on foote that way which he gussed y^e chariot had gone. In this way straunge things befel him, as shall appeare in the chapter folowing.¶ The aduentures of the Emperour in folowing the enchaunted chariot. Cap. ix.THe Emperour being as you heard cast on lande, he behelde well how the Islande was as it were walled about with a faire & fresh water, the fairest that euer he had séene, then looking further into y^e lande, he marked also how it was furnished with so many trées, and of so divuers sortes that it was verie straunge in respect of their vnmeasurable height & greatnesse, vnderneth these the grounde was beautified with swéet roses & other fragrant flowers, amongs the beddes wherof there ran by chanells a very cleare and christallin water, able to delight the most weryed sences & trauailed minde that might be. Besides these, to make vp a full messe of disport, there was a swéete and pleasaunt song of birdes, which seemed to reioyce in the brighte and cleare morning, besides a thousand other pastimes which I let passe, to long to make a tale off. But yet of al these, y^e noble Emperour tooke no care, for the thought of his lady detained from him, but onely he beat all both knowen and vnknowen wayes, to finde out that wherein the chariot had gone. At length he winded one, but an vnvsed way, which by all lykelyhood was the same which he would haue, in that the grasse séemed new pressed downe. This tract the noble Emperour followed on foote, without y^t either the heauinesse of his armour or the length of the way, made him to rest any whit. From the morning a full halfe day the Emperour had continued his iourney, not méeting any person, at whome he might aske newes of that, which he most desired. But afterwards leuing the thicke and pleasaunt woode, he came into a faire gréene or medow full of roses and other swéet hearbs and flowers of all colours, without any other shade in all the medowe then those trées which serued for a hedge vnto it. The length of this medow séemed thrée bowe shotte vnto the myddest, where was situated a goodly castle, and in good proportion. It was foure square, hauing at eache corner a toure, and on euery side one in the middest of the side, all

of them so high as if they should haue edged with the clouds. This great castle was enclosed and shut in with a high and thicke wal, the stones whereof and the toures, dyd shine lyke Chrystel, or the well polyshed steele against the sunne beames. Rounde about the walll there was a déepe moate, the water being so broad, as a man might scare cast a stone from the one side to the other. Ouer the water there was a bridge, verie large and well toured so strong according to the depth of the water, that it might haue withstood a thousand men. Thrée toures it had in al, one in the enteraunce, an other in the middle, and the third at the furthest ende: each of them very high and greate, and wrought with the same stone, that the great castle was buylded with. The two outermost toures of the bridge, aswell the entry as that towards the castle, were gated and barred with dores and locks of fine filed stéele, being so shéene that it serued for a looking glasse vnto the passengers. The lockes were so shut, that vnleffe they were opened on y^e inside, it was vnpossible to vndoe them. The good Emperour scanned vpon all this, the like wherof he had not séene in all his life, and concluding fully that no such buylding might be made by mans hand, yet hee meruailed that of an Ilande so faire and delectable, there was no more noyse bruted especailly standing as it seemed to him in a sea so saileable. He beleued that the princesse was within, because there appeared to him no other building in all y^e Iland, & therefore taking wide steps, hee passed on towards the gate of stéele, wher finding it closed, he toke a great hāmer hanging therby, & bounsed at y^e gate with such force vpon the sounding stéele, that the fury of the rap was heard through all y^e toures, and a great part of y^e Iland. For all this none shewed themselues to make him aunswer, although he had stood more then a whole houre calling and knocking, at length with some trouble he departed from thence to coast the water, if perchaunce he might light vpon any other way into the castel. When

he had gone a tourne about, at one part of y^e wall he happened vpon a gentlewoman, which was in a little boate newly taking land at a little postern dore of yron, when y^e gentlewoman had taken footing on y^e lande, she opened the gates, making shew as if she would haue entred, leauring the vessell in y^e water. The Emperour strained his voice to call vnto hir y^t she should stay, but she feigning as though she heard him not, made to y^e wicket, wher as she was to fasten y^e doore: y^e Emperour cryed yet lowder, then she tourned toward him, & as though she had but then espyed him, she sayd vnto him. "What would you haue sir knight?" The Emperour prayed hir to come néerer, for y^t he would onely demaund a certein thing of hir: with this she tooke hir boat againe & with a little ower, rowed towards the land, wher the Emperour was: whᄓ she came somewhat nere y^e banck there staying, she sayd vnto him. "What is it y^t you would haue sir knight, in that you haue called mée so lowd. That which I would fayre gentlewoman, answered y^e emperour is y^t you would ferry me eyer in yonr boat vnto the castle, for y^t I haue to do with one of y^e Giants which are within. If you haue to dele with thē said y^e gētlewomā, they be no people on whom you way win honour. That is true said y^e emperour, I haue no desire to trouble them, if they wil do y^t which I require them. Sith it so said y^e gentlewoman I will do your commaundement, bicause you looke like a knight worthy of this seruice. I giue you great thanks for your courtesie" answered y^e emperour, & with this he entred the boat, & shouing with y^e rudder towards y^e castle he got thether. The gētlewoman went in, leading y^e emperour w^t hir, & closed y^e dore after hir, cōducting him through a little court to an other priuie dore, which was not y^e cōmon entrie. She opened a wicket w^t a key which she had at hir girdel, & brought him farther into a gardeine the most delightsōe y^t art might deuise. The emperour now tooke him selfe to be in a terrestrial paradise, & gasing a while theren, w^tout remēbring y^e occasiō of his thether cōming he was so estranged[∗]"estranged" in catchphrase only.
from him selfe. Out of this garden by an other dore, they came into a large courte of the castle, buylt with brighte Alabaster, the excellencie wherof in y^e ymagerie & workemanshippe cannot be declared. For in comparison of this enchaunted Castle, either the sumptuous buylding of Mansolus tombe, or the famous Pyramides of Aegypt, or the maze of Dædalus making, founde in Crete, may wel be forgotten. And as the Emperour mused on all this, the gentlewoman knowing him to be distraught, caught him by the hande, and brought him to a payre of stayres, the steppes whereof were all of Jasper, by them he mounted with hir into a chamber foure square, of the largenesse of a stones cast. In this yet she opened a nother dore, with three stepes of siluer plate, out of the goldsmithes shoppe, through which she brought y^e emperour into a more stately chamber, foure square as the other was and very rich, whereof the seeling and reofe were engrauen gold embossed with many precious stones, sending foorth such a light as it was meruaylous. The Emperour tooke no keepe of the riches of the place, but of the beautie of a number of faire gentlewomen whome he saw, sitting richly apparailed in euerie part of y^e chamber. Among these one seemed to be the principall, stalled in a seate highter then the other, and passing them all, so well in beautie as in rich apparel. She, as lady and mistres aboue them all, held in hir hand a Lute, whereon she played and sung together with such an harmony, that it was no lesse daungerous vnto the poore Emperour, then the alluring song of y^e Mermaides should haue bene vnto Vlysses company. She sang swetly and she withal reached hir warbling notes so high and so shrill, that it much pleased the Emperour. Hir faire & golden haire hung downe hir backe, and coured both hir shoulders. And you must pardon the Emperour if by this he was wholy possessed with hir loue, & forgot his late wife the Princesse Briana. The entertainment was great, and yet this chaunge proceded not throuh the beautie of 

the enchauntresse, for his owne wife was much fairer, but rather by the secreate vertue of the place, which was therto deuised, accordinge as shall bee recited hereafter. By this time the Emperour had cleane loste the remembraunce of his wife, his Empire, countrey, and what els perteined to him, onely reioysing in the loue of Lindaraza, (for so thys Lady was called) this hee estéemed for his principall happe and good Fortune. When the Emperour has stoode stone still a while, this Lady rose from hir seate, and laying downe hir lute which shée helde in hir hand, with his gentlewomen wayting on hir, and with a good grace she made towardes the Emperour, to take him by the hand, saying vnto him. You are welcome most noble and worthy Emperour Trebatio, for whose cōming I haue long time wished. The Emperour glad of such a welcome, & making not straunge of his courtesy, albeit he could not finde wherby she should know his name, he aunswered hir. "Madame my arriuall cannot be but good, sith by it, I may beholde the pricke & price of all this beautie in the world, consipiring as it were in your excellencie, and sith you receiue me with such fauour, I beséech you tell me who you are, least by not knowing you I might foreslow that duetie which I owe vnto your person. This account replied the Lady, shall be made in better time. Now know you that I am all yours, and there shal not be done by me or my gentlewomen other thing, but to doe you pleasure in my pallaice." The Emperour was intrapped with hir pleasant speach, and knew not whether he were in heauen or in the earth, and willing to kisse hir hand for the grace she shewed him, she thought no scorne of a kisse on hir chéeke when it was profred. Then she led hym by the hande vnto the place where hir owne throne was, there the Emperour felte in himselfe a great contentment by the touching of hir white and delicate handes, imagining with himselfe that he was transferred into a second heauen.Some of the laides helped to vnarme him, & other were not idell, either playing on their harpes, or singing and making such musike, as well eased the mindes of the enamored, some brought rich robes to attire the Emperour withall, other conserues and comfettes very comfortable, with delicate wine in great plates and cups of golde to refresh him as he had had, by reason of the trauaile he had taken on foot, although other meat liked him better which was the sight of the faire Lindaraza and hir companie, & she no lesse enamored with him beheld him goodly, & with hir knide in one hand, and a napkin in the other, she hir selfe carued vnto him of those pleasant conserues. I do not thinck that the Emperour refrained vpon straungenes, but she to qicken his stomake with many a pleasaunt deuise and other amorous perswasions made him eat a good, and very swéete were those morsels vnto him. When this collation was ended, with some solempnitie y^e faire Lindaraza lead him a side vnto a great bay window, opening vpon y^e fresh & gladsome gardein, through which the Emperour with the gentlewoman had before passed. There they both beguiled the time with pleasaunt speach & melodie which the ladies made in a fresh arbour vpon y^e top of two trées the Lawrel & the Cipres, the Tenor béeing mainteined among them onely by Nightingales. I denie not but the sauour also of y^e swéet smelling flowers refreshing their sprits did encrease their appetites, and gaue hope of better ioy to come. When it was time to sup, the tables béeing sped, they were serued of exquisit deinties. Supper being done, the two estates fell to their wonted discourses. It was now night, and yet there needed neither torch nor candel. The brightnes of the stones enchaffed in y^e walles made the chambers as light as the daye, when it was time to sleepe, the fayre Princesse Lindaraza brough the Emperour to hir owne lodging, richly adorned with silke and golde where was a riche and stately bedde, and there vnclothed by hir gentlewomen both of them wente to

bed, & remaining thus, both of thē reioyced of their leues to their contentations. As y^e Emperour had thus liued wantonly many dayes, depriued of his vnderstanding, sauing onely in honoring hir which was before him. In the end, y^e beautiful Lindaraza was great with childe, & bare him a daughter of rare beautie called Lindaraza, by hir mothers name: from whō issued a great & noble race, which biscause in his place it shall be largely declared, I shall ouerpasse now, briefly touching such occurrents as I read off, in the meane time.¶ The Emperours knightes finde not their Lord, and the Hungarians misse the Prince of England. Cap. 10WHen the Emperour Trebatio was in his quest of the nchaunted chariot, the story telleth that his knights might not come nere him, some bicause they could  not take their horses, and some biscause his horse ranne so fast, for he ouercame in halfe a daies iourney the trauaile of .viij dayes (as I thinke) for that he was caried both by his own desire & the diuels driuing, otherwise it had ben impossible to haue endured so great paines. For this cause I say, although the knightes rode so fast as they might, yet they could not come within the sight of him, nor finde whiche way he was gone, yet with sorrowe and griefe, especially through the feare which they conceiued by his medling with y^e Giants, they parted companies, euery man taking a seuerall way to seeke the Emperour, and they areéed at the monthes ende to meete at one place. The moneth came when as yet none of them had heard any news of him, although they sought him in diuers partes. They all meruayled, but not knowing what to say, in the end, they determined at some other time to meet & to enter into this queste againe. For this time they altogether tooke towardes the campe which they lefte before the Citie of Belgrado, where they abode not longe, but remembring themselues of their promise, they met at the place appointed, and deuided themselues accordingly. The iiij. Hungarian knights, fering to be diseried by those which went to séeke prince Edward the couertliest which they might, they went toward the campe of the Emperour & ther remained sometime, after they folowed into Greece, wher they tarried til y^e retourne of y^e Emperour, according as shall be mentioned hereafter. Now by this time with no lesse care & diligēce, prince Edward was sought by many knights in all y^e kingdome, for that the king had giuen him no longer time to remaine in y^e monastery of the riuer then thrée dayes. There was already tolde xx. daies when he came not. First thē he sent many of his knights to know y^e cause of his tarrying, these retourned vnto y^e king with answere y^t they neither found him in y^e minster, nor could here tidings of him by the way. Then the king dispatched other messengers to enquire after him and his knightes in all the land, but they brought the like aunswere, yet again he sent more then 1000 well prepared for warre, with authoritie of search through al his kingdome, that they might bring newes of life or death. But al was one, last or al, fearing least peraduenture he had ben taken prisoner by  enimies, he wrote vnto the Emperours camp to know the truth, to the ende he might ransome him, if so it were, but not hearing any newes, he then bewailed the losse of the prince, and became very sorowfull, like as contrary wyse y^e emperials bemoned their Emperour. These things happened so in the necke one of an other, that Tiberios iudgment failed to decide y^e truth, & he pittied him with no lesse griefe then if he had bene his owne sonne, partly for hys daughters sake, who must néeds be partener of hir husbāds misaduenture, & partly for the princesses parents who could not w^tout some sorow cōceiue of his missing, albeit al this happened more by y^e misguiuing of his own minde, then by any certeintie he found. You haue heard perticulerly the care of the king Tiberio, now you must consider of the diligence of y^e king of Boheme by y^e semblable. An other month had end & knight votaries sped thĳ homwards to y^e camp

of the Empereur without any newes of their Lorde, which no doubte much molested the whole hoast, but in especiall it afflicted the kinge of Boheme to see them come without him. As they made declaration of the whole monethes trauaile, it litle pleased the king, onely for the loue hee bare to the Emperour and the wante of his presence in a time so daungerous, hee wept as sore for him, as if he had seene his little childe giue vp the ghost. The losse of the Emperour thus published through the armie, there was no one which sorowed not inwardly, for he had the loue of all his subiects.Albeit this was bootelesse, yet his loue beguiled him, for y^e king yet charged more then 2000. knights with y^e search of y^e Emperour in al places, as well by sea as by land, but it naught auailed, for y^e iland of Lindaraza held him so sure that he could not be found, and if he had bene found, yet he was so wel garded, that the whole hoast had not ben able to haue deliuered him from the inchaunted castle. While these things were in dooing, the king of Bohome him selfe set the remainder on woorke to assalt the cite, with ful purpose not to leaue the siege, till either he knew where the Emperour was, or had lien a halfe yeare longer, at the ende whereoff he would raise the siege and so depart into Greece againe. In this time the Hungarians issued out of their citie against the Grecians, and there was betweene them many cruell and bloudy skirmishes. The Greekes did nobly as you may reade in their seuerall histories, at this time bicause they are not of the substaunce of my matter I will not name them, onely I will recount vnto you the perticuler truth of that which followeth.¶ The Princesse Briana taketh great sorowe at the losse of Prince Edward. Cap. 11. GReat was the diligence which the king of Hungary commaunded his knightes to make, in seeking the

Prince Edward, and as greate was his griefe in not finding him by the consideration of the towardnesse of the noble knight, and the dole of his parentes béeing their déere and onely sonne. But greater must néedes bee and inexpressible, the mortall doler which the Princesse Briana conceiued when shee once heard of the misse of Prince Edward. And as I reade, at the thrée moneths ende, when nothing was reported, for very anguish of heart, (besides hir often sowninges) after when shee recouered out of the traunce, shée séemed to them néerer the death, then the Prince hir husbande was, as they thought: for beléeuinge that hee was deade, shee would neither eate, drincke, nor sléepe, but became weake and féeble, and wasted hir dayes with sorrowe. She layde a part all hir princely robes, and precious iewels, and tired hir selfe in course mourning wéedes of a widow. She kept hir selfe in a secret chamber, onely with the comfort of hir gentlewomen, and cōming not foorth one step, demeaned rather the life of an Anchresse, or religous woman, then of a Princesse. The Quéene mother then abidinge at Buda, came often times to visite hir, and in hir company other great Ladyes, but they could not remoue the dulnesse of hir melancholy. Ere the Princesse had long led this solitary life, she felt hir selfe quick with childe, whence she tooke some ioy, but yet fearing the disclosing of it vnto hir friends whom she would not haue pertakers of it for all Hungary, before y^e solemnization of the marriage was openly performed, & therevnto, she concionated hir secret onely with one of hir gentlewomen named Clandestria, whom she best loued, and with whom she was best acquainted, for the good counsayle she often gaue hir. Shée which was wise and discrete kissed hir ladies handes for the honour she did vnto hir, in reuealing suche a secrete, onely a little withstandinge hir entent of concelement at the first, and 

perswading that "it was no reason why shee shoulde not bewray hir childbering vnto the king hir father, and the Quéene hir mother, for that séeing it pleased God to giue you a childe by a lawfull husbande, it were not amysse if it were knowen abroade, bée it sonne or daughter. And sayth she moreouer, if God gyue you a man childe, prince Edward thus perishing, as we knowe no other, this your chylde is lawfull inheritour of great Britaine in the right of his father, the king nowe liuing hauing no issue male. Wherefore me thinckes you shoulde doe him wronge, séeing he hath lost his father, to depriue hym also of hys lawefull succession. The Princess aunswered, perswade me not to this good Clandestria, for though the chylde which shall bée borne of mée, should be Lorde of the whole world, I would not tell this secrete to any bodie, but to thée. And if it shall please God that the Prince Edwarde  shall sée vs once agayne, it shall suffice, let him discouer it when he sées time. If it fall out otherwise, may sonne may well beare the losse of great Britaine, and it bée but to accompany mee in the losse of so worthy an husbande." Clandestria woulde haue entred farther in thys perswasion with the Princesse, but séeing it would not bée, she gladly made offer of hir seruice. Then sayde the Princesse, what doest thou thincke is best to bée done in this thing. "The beste which I can aduise you sayd the gentlewoman, is that you madame gouerne the childe so that it perish not in your wombe, and when the time of your trauaile shall bée at hande, that you faine vnto your gentlewomen a solempne fast and prayer xl. dayes without to be seene or visited of your gentlewomen or any person sauinge mée, whome you will haue to wayte on you onely for your necessarye repast. The glasse which you shal set on it shal be this, that you will praie to God for prince Edward your husband, y^e shew wil be credible inough by means of your life hitherto. This would I haue you do madame, for this cause take your lodging"

in one part of the house ioyning to the wood béeing very good & solitary for this purpose. If you be deliuered in this time, I will conueigh it to a sister of mine lately married, and dwelling in the citie of Buda. She bare a sonne about a month past, and will nourse your child carefully. This counsell liked wel the Princesse, bicause it was consonant to hir desire. The Princesse now expecting the time of hir lying down told hir gentlewomen y^t she had vndertaken a deuotion of fast and praier, and before she entred into this obseurunce she said she would a little take hir rest, eating and sleeping somewhat more then shee was wont, which in déed she did, to preserue that which was in hir belly, albeit it was well coloured by hir continuall sadnesse. In this time the Queene hir mother was brought to bed of a beautifull boy, which much gladded al the kingdome, his name was Liriamandro, a noble prince much aduauncing the honour of y^e Hungarians, as shal be shewed you in his history. But this childing of the Queene was very cōmodious for the Princesse, for that when the Queene was brought to bed, she could not visite hir daughter at the monastery as she was accustomed.¶ The Princesse Briana was deliuered of two sonnes, Clandestria christeneth them, and causeth them to be noursed. Cap. 12.THe Princesse as you haue heard, liued somewhat contented after that she felt hir selfe to be with childe, but yet not so, but that hir colour much abated, and impaired hir beautie, & so driuing on hir daies vntill the approch of hir trauaile, she now feined to begin hir voluntary fast of fortie daies, which she before had signified vnto them, and withdrawing hir selfe into a chamber prouided for hir, she forbad the entery to all, except onely Clandestria for hir table, this they thought the Princesse had done vpon meere deuotion. The same night after she was nowe professed a holye vowesse, Clandestria tooke the keyes of the backe gates belonging to her lodginge, and opening a dore into the woode, she passed by the fieldes to Buda, standing but a mile off, and entring into hir sisters house, secretly declared the cause of hir comming, desiring hir to be as secret, bicause the Princesse would in no wise haue it manifested, she willingly promised silence, and withall departed with hir towards the monasterie, ere it was long, they came before the Princes, whom they found sitting alone, not altogether voyde of dreade, as being vnacquainted with those pangs, and hartely wishing for their comming, as without knowledge to be hir owne mydwife. When she felt the fittes of hir trauaile, she was somewhat comforted with their comming, and Clandestria, with hir sister, enforced their diligence to doe hir seruice, giuing themselues to prayer vntill it pleased God to manifest his workes in this noble Princesse.She bare two sonnes so straunge and rare for beauty, that the gentlewomen not a little wondred and yet they were more moued to sée the tokens which either of them brought seuerally from their mothers wombe. For they marked well how that the first borne, had vpon his left side a little face figured, shining as bright as if it had ben a little Sunne, & how that the other had in the middest betwéene his brests, a white Rose fashioned of so perfect making, that it séemed to be gathered, from some arbour of Roses.Before they swadled them, they layd the little boyes betwene the Princesses armes, comforting hir wiht that that God had giuen hir, two so excellent children. The mother ful of paine with y^e trauaile which she had susteined, as well as she coulde laying them to hir brests, kissed & embraced them wyth such loue and pittie, that the teares trickled downe from hir faire eyes, & with a low and softe voyce, she sayd thus."O my sonnes, I beséech the Lord, who hath made you so excedingly faire, to blesse you also with good happe, that you may ease your mother of that sorrowe wherein shée remaineth as nowe plunged, and that you proue such, as by your valours, you may recouer that which your mother to couer hir falte hath made you lose." These and other wordes spake the Princesse, weping bitter teares, vntill the nurse toke the children from hir bed, to swaddle them in clothbands, & to giue them hir brest. Now least peraduenture they shold be heard to cry, Clandestria sayd to y^e Princesse, that it were good hir sister shoulde retourne to hir owne house, where she would bring vp the younge Princes as carefully as if she were daily in her presence. The Princesse very loath to parte with hir children, bad hir do notwithstanding what she wold with them, so that she baptised them ere they went, for feare they should perish in the way. Let it be so madame sayd Clandestria, for you haue sayd very well. The nurse then toke water and pouring it on their heads, she christened thē in y^e name of God, with other formal words of baptisme, as she coulde best do. Clādestria with a very good grace, gaue names to the little boyes, the first she named Caualiero del Febo, for the figure that she saw in this lefte side néere vpon the heart, the younger she called Rosicleer for the Rose betwéene his beasts. Of this the Princesse tooke some ioy, saying she had giuen them names as they deserued. The nurse toke leaue of the Princes, and with hir husband which came on the way, and which had not stayed farre off, she gotte redily into Buda before broad light, where she fostred those noble babes as carefully as hir owne. Clandestira after she had shutte fast the dores, went vp againe to the Princesse, whome she founde discomforted for hir children. The gentlewoman pained hir selfe to comforte hir, and soberly spake vnto her, in this sort."O madame, how vnthankefull are you to God for the great grace he hath bestowed on you, in giuing you two

sonnes of so excellent beautie, and that with so little perill of your person. I beleue and holde for certeyne, that God hath not left you such sonnes, neuer to knowe their father, nor made you such a Princesse, neuer more to sée your husbnand. The workes of God are wonderfull, and that which we thincke is sette for our griefe and disease, he tourneth to our commoditie, what know you madame if God wiling to preserue your husband, hath by some aduenture brought him where he shal escape the great daungers and perils of death in which he was hourly like to incurre, in the battaile that the kinge your father hath against Trebatio. Good madame quiet your selfe, God will bringe him vnto you at such time, when you shalbe leaste mindefull of him. And if you can so ill brooke the absence of your sonnes they are not hence but one myle, thether maye you sende me, when it pleaseth you, to knowe of their welfare."Thus Clandestria discoursed with hir Lady the Princesse Briana still beating vpon this one poynt, that she shold rest hir selfe vpon Gods prouidence, and in the ende she so aswaged hir griefe that she after well endured the fortie dayes penaunce. In the ende being better at ease, and féeling hir selfe more pleasauntly diposed withall as fresh as if she had neuer abode any childebedde, toke hir lodging among hir gentlewomen, who seing hir so well and somewhat more merie then before, were glad of that alteracion, for they loued hir so hartely, that they willingly, would haue giuen their liues, to haue redeemed hir from that discontentment wherein she liued.¶ The king of Boheme raised the siege, and the king of Hungarie retourned the Princes knights into Englande. Cap. xiij.MAny and hotte bickeringes there were betwéene the Emperours people and the kinge of Hungarie, while the siege lasted against the citye of Belgrado:

but biscause the history hath more to intreate of other especial aduentures, it remēbreth not euerie particuler, which happened in the skirmish. It sayeth in effect that as those of the citie were many, so they were well prouided of all furniture, that the Greeks might not enter into the citie, albeit many of them had done meruailous deeds in armes. After one yeare was come and gone, the king of Boheme with all the principall of his hoast, thought it beste to raise the siege then lying before the citie, and with bag & baggage to marche homewardes to Constantinople, to the ende, to giue out a new order, for the finding of the Emperour. So within two dayes they had all charge to packe and prepare thē selues for their retourne: 'the souldyers not yet forgetting the losse of their Lorde, which they shewed by their cheere. The king of Boheme the emperours unckle well preceiuing it, and knowing how the good Emperour, was wont to encourage and comforte them, he tooke some paine in it at that time, and being well setled in Constantinople, for the better pacifying of all tumults, the army as yet not dispersed, he tooke vpon him the gouernment of the Empyre in his nephewes name, at the humble sute of all the Emperialls, after he prouided the best that he might, for a newe search of the Emperour, swearing many good knights vnto this enterprice. Which likewise the king of Hungarie did send certaine newes into Englande, and to haue some sufficient guide to conduct the army homewards at the end of two yeres, all which time he deteined the souldiers, vpon hope to finde their Captaine, no news being heard of him. The Kinge embarked them homewardes to greate Britaine, with giftes and presents vnto the king of Englande, and sufficient rewards plentifully bestowed vpon the mainye, ouer and aboue the due payment of their wages. This the liberalitie of the king, profited him not a little in other matters of great importaunce, as you shall vnderstande in this history. The knights thus shipped redy to depart,

were néere in number 20000. In fewe daies they coasted Fraunce, and enteringe in the narrowe seas, with a good winde they landed in great Britaine, where soone theire hanging countenaunces, gaue testimonie to the heauie newes they brough. Which thing so sore appalled y^e whole realme, that of a long time after their comminge, there was not vsed any exercise in armes: and the Quéene dyed also, adding to this myshappe, a newe corsie. This Quéene lefte behinde hir a daughter of young yeares named Oliuia, so renowned for hir beautie, that she well wanne to be loued and serued of y^e most loyall knighte of all the worlde. She was brought vp, as being enheretrix to the state, with great care by the king hir father.¶ Clandestria deuiseth with the Princesse Briana how hir sonnes might be brought vp in hir company. Cap. xiiij.THE Princesse Briana liued no doubte better contented after hir deliuerie of the ij. faire boyes, which the thought had bene Prince Edwards, & yet as I say, verie religiouslye, as it had bene in a cloyster for the reason so often alledged. Now yet somewhat there was which impaired this contentation, which was the absence of hir children. This she thought to repaire again by bringing them vp in hir owne lodging and hauing broken it vnto hir gentlewoman Cladestria, whom she desired to finde the meanes for it. Clandestria after conference had with hir mistresse, one day sayd vnto hir, that she had well forséene the meane. The Princesse then vrged hir to vtter it, which Clandestria deliuered in this speach. "Madame, that which I haue thought in this matter, is like. That one day whē I shal come from y^e citie of Buda, you shall demaunde of me what newes is there. I will aunswere you among other thinges, that a sister of mine hath two sonnes borne both in one daye, so

excellently faire, that al the lookers on, do not a little commend so goodly creatures. They are borne moreouer with notable tokens, which they bring from theire mothers wombe. You madame hearing this may say y^t you haue great desire to sée these straunge children, and may will me to procure the bringing of them into this monasterie with their mother, that here in your company they may be broughte vp, for that in such children you maye take some solace, thereby to forgette part of that which sore annoyeth you. In this manner neither your gentlewomen nor any other person shall vnderstande our secret." Clandestrias consell seemed so good vnto the Princesse, that embrasing hir many times, she said vnto hir. "My faithfull and loyall Cladestria, whē shall the day come wherin I shalbe restored vnto the first ioy and estate which I was wont to holde, and in which I may reward the good seruice thou hast done to me? Go thy way and put in effect that which thou hast deuised for mine ease. Madame sayd Cladestria, if my seruice may in any wise aswage your griefe, which I so sore pitie: I thincke it sufficiently rewarded considering the dutie wherein I stand bound vnto your highnesse, and assuredly no lesse is the pleasure which I receiue by the acceptacion of my seruice, then that which you haue by the fruition of it. But sith my counsell liekth you so well: I will make no tarying: go you madame to your gentlewomen and I wyll presently to y^e citie. Go in Gods name" sayd the Princesse, & so she toke hir to hir gētlewomen, Clandestria being in hir way towardes the citie. When Clandestria had perfourmed vnto hir sister that which the Princes had commaunded, not long after she came to the monasterie, at such time as the Princesse was in the company of hir gentlewomen. Clandestria entred into the chamber, making hir obeysaunce. The Princesse espying hir, sayde vnto hir merely."Welcome my Clandestria, how is it with the Quéene

my mother, and the young Prince Liriamandro my brother. They are all very well madame sayd Clandestria, and the Quéene your mother commendeth hir selfe vnto you by me. Well said the Princesse but what newes haue they in the citye, say they any thing of Prince Edward. Of the Prince surely I heard nothing, aunswered Clandestria, but I haue newes if it so please you to heare thē, me thincks y^e straungest that you haue heard. Tell vs thē sayd the Princesse, if they be such as you speake off, we shall haue pleasure to heare them.Knowe you then madame sayde Clandestria, that a sister of mine, which is married and dwelleth in the citye of Buda hath two sonnes of the age of two yeares, both borne at one houre, in the toppe and pitch of all beautie, so that their matches are not to be had. They haue besides markes on their bodyes such as those which haue sene them, cannot tel what to thinck of them. The first borne of them hath on his lefte side the forme of a face very beautifull and so bright, that I dare liken it to the Sunne, which ouershadoweth the earth, and for the cause the little boy is called El donzel del Febo. The other little boy hath betwéene his brests a Rose growing in the fleshe, so freshe of hewe, and so perfectly coloured that they which sée him saye he beareth the badge of his mothers bedde, as if he had bene borne in an arbour: for this token, they name him Rosicleer, I tell you madame so excellēt is their beautie that the best paynter in Hungarie, neede no other example to drawe out the picture of beautie." The Princesse making a shew of great meruayle, and as it were mistrusting the report, bicause of the straungenesse aunswered. "Truly Clandestria you haue brought vs matter of some meruaile, but I feare me y^e néerenesse of kin betwéene you maketh you to speak of affection more then knowledge, I wold y^t by sighte of them you would proue vnto vs that which you haue spoken," with this the Princesse gentlewomen, hungrye

after nouelties, importuned Clandestria to deale herein, so that they all might enioy the sight of those two so rare children. Clandestria tourning toward hir Lady sayd, "by my faith, if my Lady the Princesse be so contented, I will go to my sister, and cause hir to come hether with hir little ones." The gentlewomen then besought the Princes that she would commaund them to be brought thether. The Princesse telling them that she did it more at their requeste, then of hir owne good will, sayd to Clandestria, "you were best do this, which your felowes require you, my likinge you haue, for I my selfe woulde gladly be a witnesse of so great a meruaile." Clandestria toke hir leue of them hasting towards the citie, where hir sister dewlt and declared hir message for the bringing of the Princes. Hir sisters husband was a verie good gentleman borne, though very poore, he & his wife made them redy to come before the Princesse, with the little Princes, which by this time were of some groweth, bring two yeares olde, hauing both goodly lockes, standing as it were vpon a iust temperature of grauitie and plesaunce. When they were come to the Pallaice, Clandestria first entred into the lodging, of y^e Princesse, being as yet in y^e company of hir gentlewomen, ther she led in by the hand the faire & gratious Rosicleer. So soone as he was séene of the gentlewomen, they beleued him to be no lesse then an Angell of heauen, and that wherein Clandestria had before enstructed them, she had nothing deceaued them. The Princesse not hauing séene her children since hir first blessing of them, and now séeing the height of Rosicleer with his beautie aboue hir hope, she made such ioye as might haue well bene discerned by hir countenaūce, but hir gentlewomē more attentiue of y^e beautie wher with God had inbued y^e yoūg Rosicleer, were not ware of it. Clandestria made the little boy bowe his knées to the Princesse, and whether it were nature, or the beautie of his mother, or both, so soone as he beheld his mother, he left the other gentlewomen. The

mother taking the little boy in hir armes, kissed him many times, shedding vpon his faire chéekes great aboundaunce of teares, for the memorye which thee sonne gaue hir of hys Father, and for the great ioy she had, in hauing him so néere vnto hir. Not longe after, ther entered Clandestrias sister w^t hir husannd, leading by y^e hand the fairest among y^e most faire, Donzel del Febo. At the sight of him the gentlewomen repented them of their former iudgement as concerning Rosicleer, that there might not be his like in all the world, in the ende, the question arising of comparison, to part the striefe they agreed, that as the one moued euery one to loue him tenderly by hys gracious behauiour, so the other by his modest iestures made them to feare him with reuerence. The difference onely put in this, that the one had more maiestie, y^e other more mirth and delight in his countenance. The princesse hauing Rosicleer in her armes when she sawe hir other sonne before hir vpon his knees to kisse hir hande, with gladnesse she raysed him from the ground, and with Rosicleer in one arme, tooke him on the other, kissing him vpon his chéekes, and in déede rather obeying the loue she bare vnto hir sonnes, then regarding the feare she was wont to haue for béeing discouered, albeit to say the trouth, the Princesse was of the better hand, for all the good will she shewed, hir gentlewomen imagined to procéede of their beautie. And yet to take all suspect away, she could very wisely moderate hir passions. Clandestrias sister the supposed mother of those children, and hir husband by name Armaran, kissed the Princesses hands, where she in token of good liking entertained them as hir seruants, frō thence foorth to remaine with hir, as their sister Clandestria did. On this wise the Princes were nourished in their mothers presence, without that any knew the right parentage whereoff they came, & they so enticed the gentlewomen to the liking of them, y^t there passed not one houre, without playing and daliaunce with them. This ioy on y^e

Princesse part was vnspeakable, I dare not say, able to coutermaunde hir foreconceiued griefe, but the worst was, it was not durable. For fortune euer mutable chaūged hir copie and became so contrary, that the date of hir ease béeing out, there succéeded discease and mishap, so that hir death shoulde not haue bene halfe so yerkesome as hir life was dolorous. This shall you heare off, in the next Chapter.¶ Donzel del Febo was lost by misaduenture. Cap. 15. NOwe the creator of al things minded to manifest the worthy déedes of y^e valiant Donzel del Febo, which as yet lay hidden in the armes of the delicate gentlewoman his foster mother, and therefore in such sort, he ordered the celestiall influences, and power of the planets, that scarcely had the young gentleman fully reached vnto thrée yeares of age, when he was carryed from the princely graces of his vnknowne mother (leauing hir pensiue, and sad) into a large & maine Sea whence, béeing tossed with waues, and almost weatherbeaten, at length he escaped. Such an argument god left vs of his prowesse to come, sith in so tender age he enabled him to subdue the most raging element that is. And you which reade this hisotry, may be brought by good reason to giue credit to this my report, sith you your selues are witnesses of the euident presence of the Almightie in so certeine a daunger. And as the learned well know, Achilles hath his Pallaice in Homere, and Aeneas his Venus in Virgill, Goddesses assistaunt vnto men in their daungerous conflictes, Homere and Virgill meaning no other thing then the care of God towards his, why may not we beléeue, that if it so pleased God that this infant had the secret direction of Gods mightie hand in al his enterprises.But mine Author willing to entreate somewhat of 

him, setteth it downe thus. That in the ende of a yeare, these two beautifull boyes béeing brought vp in the monastery of the riuer, with great pleasure of the Princesse and hir gentlewomen, one day in the moneth of May, the comfort of the sunne there enforcing them to come abroad and séeke their solace vnder gréene boughes. The Princesse & hir gentlewomen leauing their lodging, went into a large & fayre orchard excéedingly well cast in one part of y^e monastery, there they tooke vp their seates at a wels mouth, ouershaddowed with trées, that the heate of the sunne could not annoy them, and sporting with the little Rosicleer, who was somewhat more giuen to play then his brother Donzel del Febo, they so much delighted in Rosicleer, that they toke no héede of Donzel del Febo, sitting not farre off. The little one being very young, yet greatly discontent to sée the small account they made of him, in a fume rose from the place where he was sette, and by soft paces got from them, without béeing espied by the gentlewomen, sauing of his mother so called, whiche loued him no lesse then hir owne selfe. She rising from the place where she was set, followed him and tooke him by y^e hand laughing a good to sée y^e choler wherin he was, & walking among the trées so long with him, that she came to a large and déepe water running through a part of the great orchard, where hard by were great store of trées, & wether the Princesse bicause the place was very pleasant often resorted with hir gentlewomen to reioyse hir selfe. When they were there, the little boy seeing the water, was desirous to playe with it. The nourse, though otherwise willinge to haue contented him, yet fearing the daunger of y^e water went farther, to finde some sure place wherby to come vnto y^e water, & taking a little boat at the banck, which y^e gardeiner vsed, in comming into y^e orchard put hir selfe in it, and the child with hir. The boy leaning his breast vpon the brimme of the boate, troubled the water with his handes & tooke vp some to wash his face,

a while after the water béeing calme and plaine, he looked in it againe and séeing his shadowe there, he began to play with it, and stroke it with his handes, now bicause it would not hiue place, but did that which he did, waxing angry, he prayed his mother to giue him a rod which lay vpon the land to beate the babe withall. It was a good pastime for hir to sée the displeasure which he had conceiued against his owne shadow, and leauing him thus, she lept vpon the land to reatch him the sticke that he required. Béeing thus on land, either with the force she put to the side of the boate, in aduanceing hir selfe out of the boate, or els biscause it was the will of God that y^e little boy should then be prest to trie the hasard of his constellation. So it was, that the boat béeing vntyde, it shooued from the shore: The nourse not perceuing it before she tourned againe, then was it more thē two yards from the land, and not hauing whereby to take holde, it bare so swiftly downe the streame in a little time, and so farre of, that she lost the sight of it. When she sawe the daunger wherin the little childe was, not hauing power to succour it, she rent hir garmentes and tore hir haire, and fell to the grounde making suche mone, that the Princesse and hir gentlewomen sitting aboute the well, heard it, and much abashed rose form the place to knowe what the noyse meant. When they sawe the pitifull dealinges of the nourse vppon the grounde, quickning their pace, they gate néere hir, and demaunding the cause of hir great lamentacion, they founde hir so sorowful that shée coulde no speake to them, but rather the more shée was comforted by them, the more shée outraged in crying, as that they iudged hir to be distraught. So longe lasted these hir cryes, that the Princesse disquieted, went towards hir, leauing Rosicleer with one of hir gentlewomen: as y^e princesse came towards hir, y^e nourse knew hir, & not hauing the boldnesse to shew how it fell out, in respect of the griefe y^e princesse would take for y^e losse of hir sonne,

before the Princesse came at hir, she ranne & lept into the water with full entent to drowne hir selfe, the which she had done, had not hir clothes borne hir vp, & the gardener hearing y^e great outcries she made, waded in the water for hir, and brought hir to land all wet and bloudy with the blowes she gaue hir selfe in the face. This caused such pitie and compassion in the princesse and all hir gentlewomen that all astonished, they abode onely to sée the nourses demeanour. In the ende at the instance of the princessse she declared how Donzel del Febo was got from hir, for the which they imparted with hir griefe, and especially the princesse benomed of all hir senses suncke to the ground with no more colour and breath then if shée had bene quite dead. The gardener extering into another boat there which he had to fish withall, pushed vp the streame amain wth his ower to ouertake y^e boat in which Donzel del Febo was caried, but all his trauaile was lost, for either by diuine promission, or by Arte Magicke, made by a learned man, as shall be tolde you hereafter, the boat rode faster then the violence of the streame might driue it, & in short time it entred into the great sea, where it followed y^e mightie waues more then 100 miles in a short space, so that neither the gardener nor who els followed them might in any wise atteine vnto him or bring newes of him. When the princes was reuiued, and remembred the chaunce of Donzel del Febo, she powred out so many salt teares from hir faire eyes, that like as out of fountaines or springs the water gusheth out aboundantly, so from hir face streamed downe flouds of water, issuing with sobs and sighes as would haue broke hir heart in a manner, such as commonly the fall of the water maketh from the stéepe mountaines. But for that she would not be hearde of hir gentlewomen, she tourned hir selfe and went towardes hir lodging, where remayning alone with Clandestria she gaue a fresh onset to hir former complaints on this sort."O mightie and souereigne Lord, wherefore doth thy highnesse suffer the Princesse Briana to liue this long, seeing she doth roll on this life with such sorow and care? O Lord, wherefore gauest thou me a husband in this world so valiaunt, séeing that so soone as I had lost y^e name of a maiden, thou madest me an vnfortunate widow? Wherefore gauest thou me sonnes with so straunge tokens at their birth, if with so sodeine misfortune I shall lose the one of them, why did I reach to so great estate, in which I must liue with sorrow? and why gauest thou me beautie, not to enioy it? Alas poore woman that I am, I sée that each thinge enforceth my paine, for Fortune the mistresse of mishap, despitefully throwing downe those on whom she frownes, hath tourned hir backe on me, which desire to liue without y^e compasse of hir whéele. As séely woman, the longer I rub out this life, the more my griefe encreaseth. When I séeke to mollifie my griefe, then my care redoubleth, and one sorrow surceasing, ther succedeth an other, as one billow followeth on the others neck in the maine sea. O thou Lord which hath created me, take me out of this deceiptfull wourld, if by death onely the intollerable misfortunes may take ende which dayly await me." These and other woordes spake the Princesse Briana, much agréeuing therewith hir gentlewoman Clandestria, who a little altering the course of hir aunswere from the platforme of the other complaint, droue with y^e princesse vnto these conclusions. First that there was hope inough to recouer hir losses, the reasons which lead hir thervnto were these. Albeit, saith she, Gods workes bée vnsearchable, yet thus bolde may we be with them, not inedling with the causes to compare the euils together, and then surely the whole course of worldly things sufficiently teach vs that God createth not such excellent personages but for excellent purposes, and not as in dombe showes vpon a stage, where the players onely present themselues and passe awaye. Againe, sayth shee, you

are altogether vncerteine of their death, and why not in so doubtful a case, should hope be as ready as rare, or perhaps you thinke as soone happens the worse as y^e better, yet the auncient prouerb is, that he which naught hopeth for, ought to dispaire naught, for hope and misgiuing are in the same subiect. Therefore sayth she, you may well hope. The second was, that she should comfort hir selfe, in the beautifull Rosicleer, who was then in hir kéeping, for saith she, he alone suffiseth to coūteruaile al y^e harmes which haue chaunced you. For I dare warrant if god preserue him, that you may name your selfe mother of y^e best knight in the world. With these, & many other goodly coūsels, Clandestria dayly laboured y^e princes to giue ouer hir griefe, but for al this, if God w^t his mightie hand, had not helde hir vp it had gone wrong with hir. For he prouided hir comfort by a man very wise and well learned in Arte Magicke, of whō shal be made mencion in this historie. By him God permitted that the prison of y^e Emperour with other appurtenaunces should be discouered, foreseeing by the signes, planets, & other naturall operations, that which seemeth impossible vnto vs. Thus the truth is, that this wise man knowing the great sorow and care wherin the Princesse liued, & wel perceiuing that vnlesse she had more succour at his handes then she had earst by other, biscause of that which befell hereafter, it shoulde be impossible to maintein hir life: determined in himself to comfort hir, & so one day as she sate alone very sorowfull weeping with great aboundaunce of teares, neere vnto y^e well where hir two sons were begotten, he appeared to hir in y^e shape of a Nymph in y^e cléere & christalin water, with y^e haire lose, & shedding vpon y^e greatest part of y^e body, & loith a face so beautifull y^t the princesse abashed to see hir, & in some feare for y^t she had not séene the like before would haue fled frō thence. But y^e Nymph called vnto hir, saying, if y^u knewest noble princesse who I am, & how wel I know thy great thoughts & passions, y^u wouldest not flye

"from me but rather stay and talke with me. Now biscause the time affords me no leasure to tarrie with thée, and to discourse at large all the loyaltie I beare vnto thee, and the desire I haue to serue thée, in a woord I pray thee take good courage vnto thee, to ouercome the great aduersities which may come, and ere it be long are like to come vnto thee, so y^t thou shalt be left altogether comfortlesse. I giue thee yet to vnderstand that Prince Edward is not nowe liuing, and that in the time wherein thy dispaire shall bee highest, thou shalt obteine thy husband againe, as safe and sound as he departed form thee, and he shall acknowledge thy children, and shall ioy in their vertues, y^t the ioy which thou shalt haue hereafter shall surmount the paine wherin thou remainest at this present. Assure thy selfe therefore that as all shall come to passe which I haue foretold thee, so were it good to keepe it in memorie, thereby to strengthen thy courage, the better to resist the malice of thy aduersary Fortune: whose wheele as it is rounde and in continall motion, so perswade thy selfe when it is at the lowest must needs tourne agayne vpwardes, and restore thee thy damages. Farewell, and hope no more to speake with me till all be accomplished which I haue sayd." In this sort preparing the Princesse to the conflict with hir aduersitie, the fayre Nymphe vanished away, diuing down into the depth of the well, and the Princesse deuising vpon this saying, as as it were besides hir selfe, not fully knowing whether she had heard these woordes, or dreamed them. For as she vnderstoode of the one parte, that Prince Edward was dead, & of the other, that she shoulde once again sée hir husbande, she was so confused in hir thought, that she knewe not what to iudge, and said to hir selfe, that peraduenture she had mistaken the Nymphe. In the end resting vppon the hope which she had made promise off, she was somewhat comforted, not doubtinge the accomplishment. Yet she remained in the monastery not willing to go out of hir lodging, and clothed alwayes

in blacke mourning apparell, and delighting in nothing so much as in little Rosicleer. Rosicleer as he encreased in yers so he exceded also in beautie, goodlynesse of body, & excellente qualities that a man might well prognosticate thereby of his valiauncye. But bicause the history shall more specially talke of him, I leaue him for this time to his nurse there to be instructed, till he shalbe called foorth to greater matters. Nowe it is time to go to the succour of Donzel del Febo his brother, who is all this time vpon the riuer.¶ The pedigree of the valiant Prince Florion & other matters as touching him. Cap. xvj.BY the most auncient and true records of the Assirians, it appeareth that in that time, when Theodoro predecessor of the great Emperour Trebatio ruled in the Empyre of Greece: there gouerned among the Persians the mightie Orixerges king of Persia and Souldan of Babilon, for his great power among the Pagans much renowned and feared. This man after he had liued in great prosperitie, dyed, leauing behinde him three sons, y^e eldest king of Persia, y^e secōd Souldan of Babilon, the thirde Lord of the Crimsin Ilande which is in the red Sea, whence also it taketh the name, bicause al y^e lād is died with y^e colour. This third brother from his youth was very studyous and geuen aboue all to Astrology, and other vnknowen sciences. In these be became so exquisitey scarse in his time might any be cōpared vnto him. The greatest parte of his life time, he dwelt in that Ilande choosing that place as most conueient for his studie. The eldest of thrée brethren, being king of Perfia dyed about xl. yeares after this distribution of their enheritaūce, hauing for heir a sonne of his xx. yeares olde called Florion, a valiant and stronge knight, bigge made and of a goodly stature. This Florion being

a young man but of a great courage, putting in his roome a viceroy for his kingedome, wandred as a knighte arrant through the world to seeke aduentures, wher he did great and noble déedes of armes. At the ende of three yeares, after this absence from his country, he stroke euer towards the courte of the Souldan of Babilon his vnckle. Where he remained sometimes very well welcomed and beloued of the Souldan, for he was a good knight. The Souldan had a little sonne and a meruailous faire daughter whose name was called Balisea, of hir Florion became enamoured & requiring hir to wife of hir father, she was graunted him, and the mariage clebrate betwene them with great solemnitie of feasts and triumphs. While he was thus within doores sporting, ther was worse newes abroad. For a mightie Pagan called Africano the brauest and boldest knight that euer was in all the coastes of Africke had transported ouer into Asia, and by his greate force in fewe dayes subdued the whole country of Media and two other kingdomes adiacente, belonging to two great Pagan Princes. These thus vanquished, after became tributaries and subiects & vassalls. The fame whereof was bruted farre and néere, that there wer few kings in those parts which requested not his amitie, for al accounted him y^e lustiest warriour in the worlde: & sooth it is that in all Asia was neuer borne so proude and fierce a Pagan.But he was gainesayde by him, vnto whose courtesie not onely our liues and liuings, but we our selues stande thrall and subiect, otherwise he had in fewe dayes made himselfe Lorde of the greatest part of all Asia. This Pagan was a huge and mightie man, large lymmed or the bignesse of a Gyant, and so strong and weightie with all that the strongest horse which was, he coulde make to bowe betwene his legges, any péece of armour howe fine soeuer it were hée woulde bende and wreathe in his hတds, as easely as if it had ben framed of waxe. This mā well knowing his owne forces and estate, and not con-

tented with that he had gotten in few dayes determined to inuade the kingdome of Persia, to bring that also to his subiection. Into it he entred, and in a little time he conquerred many cities playning townes and castells, all this while the Prince Florion being in Babilon. The Péeres of his kingdome sent messengers vnto him, declaring the whole state of y^e coūtry, how vnable it was to make resistaunce, without the leuying of a newe army, and some forrayne succours.Then the Prince assembled the royallest army that he might in the lande of the Souldan and shipped into Persia, there to giue battaile vnto Africano, & to punish by armes his enemies intrusion. But he reckened without his host. For he had not rode x. myles in hys owne kingdome when the mightie Africano came and pytched néere with his whole army, and in the first fielde discomfited Florion the most part of his people being slayne. The Prince Florion hasted into Babilon, for euer dispairing to be reuested in his segniories, and Africanos power was so great, that he well wotte al the Souldans power to be of little force to withstande him. The Souldan receiued him gladde of his escape, but yet sorye agayne for his people and disheritinge of his Nephewe in so noble a kingdome.As they were thus sorowfull within a fewe dayes after came into y^e court the third brother Lyrgandeo, which as the story sayth inhabited the crimson Ilande, at his comming they wer much quieted, he bad them be at rest and not take care for the kingdome of Persia for that there was among the Christians a childe borne in the happiest and most fortunate houre that euer knight had bene borne in, the which by good aduenture shoulde be brought to these parts, and by his noble valour and vertue, shoulde delyuer the Souldan and the Princesses his daughter from deathe, or from perpetuall

imprisonment, & dispossessing the wicked intruder, should place the Prince  Florion in his lawfull enheritaunce, to his owne great glory and the vtter confusion of his enemies. This done that Florion should enioy his kingdome in peace and tranquilitie all his life, vntill then he requested them to haue patience, sith it is not yet saith he when these things shall happen.Lyrgandeo was helde for a very wise man, and they all beleued his saying, for that at other times he had deuined of many things which came to passe accordingly: but yet they knew not who that knight might be so strong as to resist the force of Africano, for he was reputed the brauest & most valyant knight of the worlde, & they were very desirous euery day to heare of his arriuall in their lande. Now not a moneth after this the wise Lyrgandeo, counsailed with the Prince Florion in secret willing him immediately at that houre to take xx. knights of the best he had in a warre shippe, as it wee to scowre the coasts. Wher sailing in the Sea Mediterraneum, Fortune should bring vnto their power two little boyes the most beautifull and excellent that euer he had séene, with these sayth he you shall retourne to Babilon, for these are the nurses of your good happe. THe Prince glad to please his vnckle, chose out his knights, and tooke leaue of the Souldan, departing from Babilon, and passing through Asia the lesse, he came to a hauen in Phrygia, where he put himselfe and his mates in a ship well puruayed of vittaile, and lately rigged and trimmed for some such voiage. In this with a prosperous winde he sayled till at the ende of xij. dayes mounting on the tilbacke of the shippe to looke if perhaps he might behold the thing, of which the wise man had tolde him. It was so that he kenned a farre off a little barke in which the gentleman of the Sunne was driuing towardes them, and the wauer rocking it on eury side. It might be that this boate defended the burden naturallye,

as onely following the course of the waues: But I rather beleue that God which had created him with so wonderfull marks, tooke this care and kéepe of him, vntill that Florion espying the barke comming righte towards him, and the gentleman in it so beautifull and bright as an Angell of heauen, no tounge can expresse the ioy that nowe he promised himselfe touching the perfourmaunce of that hope which Lyrgandeo gaue him to repossesse his kingedome. His conceit also as concerning the beautie of Donzel del Febo was, that some one of his celestiall gods had begotten him on some faire Lady here on the earth, as therefore as to a personage, which did participate with the deitie, he bowed himselfe, honouring and embracing Donzel del Febo, & vpō his kées thancked his gods for y^e grace they did him in deliuering into his hands one w^t whom they themselues might ioy. The beautiful yoūg gentleman, which saw him so before him embased, feared him not a whit although y^e armour glittered, but with a ioyfull and pleasant countenaunce rolled him and clasped his armes about his necke, as if he had knowen him a long time. I doe not thincke that the desire of safety made him so to fawne vpō Florion, for they with whom he was earst acquainted wore no armour. But the Prince Florion tooke him vp in his armes and kissed his white & roseall chéekes as tenderly as if he had ben his owne childe, making him to eate of y^e most delicate meats which he had thē on boorde. The little boy which was very hungry fed very well, and from that time foorth loued the Prince Florion more then any other: as it is natural in man to preferre those of whome they receiue benefites. When the gentleman of the Sunne was well satisfied, the Prince Florion entred againe into his owne shippe and hoysed sayle toward Phryga with a good winde.¶ Prince Florion in his waye homewardes findeth by aduenture the young gentleman Clauergudosonne to the king Oristeo of Fraunce and bringeth him with the gentleman of the Sunne to Babilon. Cap. xvij.THe second day after the Prince Donzel del Febo, had bene thus taken into Florions shippe, they tourned about towards Phrygia whence they first departed and escried at thrée of the clocke in the morning right against their shippe an other the tallest & beautifullest shyp that they had euer séene, which the faster it sayled, the nerer it approched to their vessell. For the Pilot directed ther course straight vpon Florions ship, and in short space they ioyned together. This ship grappling with the other, by and by a Chefetaine getting vpon the hatches commaunded all in the other shippe to yeelde as prisoners. Then the strong Florion not knowing who they were, toke a heuy & well stéeled battell axe, & getting vpon y^e shipbord, made him aūswer on this wise. What art thou knight so arrogant, which without knowing who we be, wouldest make vs thy prysoners. "What may you be sayd the knight that you can acquite your selues from the terrible Mambriniano which commeth in this shippe, now except you do this that I commaund you, all the world is not sufficient to make you a way to escape his handes. Untill this day there was neuer borne a man which hath made lyke effusion of humaine bloud in this Sea. Then fayne would I sée this braue knight" aunswered y^e Prince Florion, and scarcely had spoke these wordes, when the diuelish rouer armed with a very great & heauie armour, & a battell axe of fine stéele in his handes, ioyned to the Prince spedely, and without God spede you, layde at him such a blowe vpon the headpéece, as might haue clouen his head in peces. But the Prince was delyuer and quicke, and séeing the battell axe descending, the ayre beaē before it, he stept aside & the blowe fell vpon the plancks of the ship, which made a great péece thereof to fall into y^e water, quite shutting him, from hope of a second blowe. Then the bolde
Florion closing with him, gaue him a buffet with his sworde, vpon his great and fine helmet that he made him bowe his knees, and with the great weight of his body scarcely might this rouer arise, but he tourned himselfe with great paine to strike the Prince. There beganne a braue and terible battayle, either of their knights much amased in beholding thē. Now wel fare thy hart thou valyant Florion, for thou much disappointedst Mambriniano of his enterprise, & madst him confesse that in twentie yeres robbing on the Sea, of so many as he might finde, he had neuer met knight which had put him in so great daunger, nor fought with one of so great force. Thus they fought halfe an houre & no man might iudge who should haue the better. The great rouer strake with all this force at his enemy, (but the finall houre of his owne life nowe edging néere him) so it was that the couragious Prince auoyded it, & as he as already entred into the good successe of his voyage, hauing in his power the gentleman of the Sunne, so fired all with wrath, his colour (as a man might say) bewraying his choler, he gaue the rouer with both hys hands such a blowe vpon the head that he felled him to the grounde, and before the rouer might get on his knees, he gaue him another betweene his helmet and his neckepeece, and layd him flat vpon the planks of the shippe. Ther the wretched Mambriniano with his gluttonos desire spitte out his stincking and corrupted spyrite, and the noble Florion rested not heere but with a braue and stoute courage entred in the shippe and layde about him on both sides. The knights of the rouer to reuenge their Lords death wounded him on all all parts, but by and by there boorded them the twentie knights of the Prince, all chosen men of war & helped their Lord in suche wise, that in shorte time the greatest parte of their enemies were slayne, and the reste seeing their fall, yeelded themselues to his mercye. The battaile thus ended, the Prince would see what was

in the shippe for be beleued that there was within great riches according as the dealings of y^e rouer had ben. Ther was much treasure found, but searching euery place of it, they found in a cabbin a knight of an indifferent age clothed with rich garmets, and by his graue countenaunce seeming to be of good account, and néere vnto him a young gentlemen of foure or fiue yeares olde, very beautifull & séemely arayed in cloth of golde and about his necke a coller of golde set with rich and precious stones. The young gentleman was so gratious in behauiour y^t if Florion had not before séene the gentleman of the Sunne he had beleued him to be the fariest and properest gentleman that euer he had séene, and desiring to know who they were, he saluted them courteously, willing the knight to tell him who they were. He which had already knowne Florions great vertue in the battaile that hee had with the rouer, rose with the young gentleman from the place where he was sette, and vsing an humble duetie to him aunswered, "Syr knight I am a prisoner to the rouer, Mambriniano, which toke me and this young gentleman at a place nere a hauen of the Sea, and sith G O D by Fortune hath bene so fauourable vnto you, that in a righteous battaile you haue slaine him, we remaine now for yours to doe with vs that which shall seeme best vnto you, and we haue good hope that with a knight of so great valour, there cannot happen vnto us so much euill as with him which tooke vs prisoners." The Prince accepted well that which he sayd vnto him, and prayed him to go on in declaringe who he was, for that be lacke of knowledge he might foreslacke to doe to them the honour that they merited. Albeit nowe the knight wished that he might dissemble it for the daunger which might ensue, yet in the ende, putting his assiaunce in the Prince, he sayd vnto him. "Sith it lyketh you sir knight to know who we be only to please you I will tell it you, though I would gladly haue suppressed our names till Fortune somewhat more friendly

vnto vs should haue bewrayed it. But knowe you that this young gentleman is called Clauergudo, and is the sonne of the king Oristeo, king of Fraunce, onely inheritour and successour of that great kingdome, and I haue to name Armineo, béeing brother to the king Oristeo & vnckle to this young gentleman. The whole order of this misfortune was in this sorte. One day for to sporte our selues in the company of many other knightes, we rode to a fayre forest néere vnto the Sea, and the knightes which came with vs, the most of them delighting in hunting, seuered themselues for their desport, in such manner that the young gentleman and I with onely x. knightes were left in a fresh and fayre harbour about a well, néere adioyning vnto the Sea. In this time while our knights followed their game, this great Rouer Mambriniano whether espying vs, or by chaunce taking lande for fresh water, wée knowe not, but with more then .xx. knightes he beset vs, and alhtough wée defended our selues sometime, in the ende, this gentleman and I were taken prisoners, and our .x. knightes slayne and sore wounded before the other knightes which hunted in the forest might vnderstande of it. He carryed vs to his shippes where it is more then a moneth y^t wee haue ben in this maner as you haue seene vs, close pent vp in this cage. For my selfe Sir, as I neuer hope for libertie, so I respect not my imprisemnent, but for this fayre young gentleman my heart is sore wounded. I had rather suffer .x. deathes, then any such misfortune should happen to him. Biscause that when such newes shall be reported to hys father, he will feare it more impatiently then his owne, & that which worst is, to me onely will he attribute this fault, sith hauing committed his onely sonne to my gouernaūce, I haue giuen so ill account of him," vnto these words y^e knight lent many a teare slyding down his face, which well shewed y^e griefe he bore in heart. The prince Florion in great compassion comforted him, promising libertie of

retourne into his countrey when he would, but by and by remembring the wordes which the wise man his vnckle had sayd, he called it backe againe, and in stéede of his first promise, he tourned his tale to the narration of his owne mishaps, being on this wise. "I thanck you hartely for your courtesie, in recounting to me the whole discourse of your imprisonment, and of this young gentlemans captiuitie, and I call y^e high Gods to witnesse, what paine your misfortune hath caused in me, and howe ready my power shalbe to remedy it when I may. For I meane to giue you libertie of retourne, and with my men to conduct you homewardes into Fraunce, thus much occasioned in mée by the deserts of your estate. But Fortune hath bene so contrary to me, that except your retourne be delayed, I my selfe shall want my necessary helpe, the whole state of the matter lying thus, if it so please you to heare, I am by the name Florion, king of Persia, my father deceasing whiche was king thereoff, & so by iust title as to his onely sonne and heyre, y^e crowne of y^e kingdome descended to me. This charge I susteined in mine owne person a good while, but being young and lustie, and in good age to followe armes, I was desirous to wāder in y^e world. So leauing a gouernour in my kingdome I trauailed through diuers coūtries vntill y^e ende of thrée years, at which time I tooke ouer into Babilon, where I was matched with y^e daughter of the Souldan béeing mine vnckle. Thether came ambassadors from my subiects, certifying me y^e king of Media the Pagan in al y^e heathen cositrey, w^t maine force had intruded vpon my kingdome: I for to remedy it, gathered a great host in y^e Souldans land, & trāsporting into Persia, at y^e first battaile y^t I had with y^e king of Media, y^e greater part of my people being slaine, my selfe was ouerthrown, & with great griefe by secret bywaies recouered Babilon, wher I could willingly haue dyed for paine anguish. But one myne vnckle, a very wyse & learned man in Art Magicke, recomfort me saying, that the time should come, in
 
which I should be restored to my kingdome with great honour, & y^t for this it behoued me to await on y^e sea, till I met w^t two little boies of excellent beautie: with whom I should retourne to Babilon, for that they should bée the principall cause of my redresse, and so giuing credit to hys word, I thus put my selfe in aray, for this aduēture, where thanckes be to the Gods, all hath sucéeded as y^e wiseman forespok it, for within this thrée daies I lighted vpon one béeing alone in a little boat, hauing in him according to my fancie, the very pride of all beautie, and the other must néedes be this young gentleman Clauergudo y^t fairest be side him y^t euer I knew, so as I haue good hope hereby to reēter into my kingdom. For this cause I haue in charge to bring these two to Babilon, & now sir knight I beséech you to take it in good part, for he shal be as wel entertained in y^e court of the Souldan as in y^e court of the king his father, & when my good fortune wil y^t my seat shal be established, he & you shall retourne into Fraunce w^t my ships, & my people, & my selfe also if it be so conuenient. When y^e prince had here stayed, Armineo was wel contented with his talke, taking him for a knight of great prowesse, & althought y^e long stay y^t y^e prince Clauergudo should make in this countrey gréeued him: yet with hope to retourne in the ende, séeing it was not in his power to doe otherwise, he subiected his will to tbe princes commaunde, & with courteous woordes rendred him thanckes for the storie of his aduentures, & for y^e offer he had made theē, y^e pith of his aunswere being in few words this. Be it as you haue said syr, for I denie not but y^e gentlemā Clauergudo shal gaine very much by his bringing vp in yours & your vnckles so noble a court. With these profers to and fro, Florion toke Clauergudo in his armes, & entred in his own ship, Armineo following him, when Armineo had behelde within Florions ship the young Donzel del Febo, you must not meruaile though hée blessed himselfe, for there was none whiche had had but a blushe of him within his tender

yeares but tooke him rather to be a celestiall Seraphin, then an humaine creature, and beleeued that this might not be done without some great misterie, as if y^t younge gentleman shewinge in hys infancie the comelinesse of stature, and other excellent qualities wherewith he was endued, besides the straunge findinge him alone in the rage of the tempest, dyd well foreshewe his nobilitie in time to come. But when they sawe him naked and the portrature of the Sunne, with the brightnesse that it gaue to the beholders, it was so straunge that they caled to minde Phaetons fall out of heauen, comparing thys younge gentleman with Phaeton as if he had bene Phoebus sonne, like as Phaeton was, although somewhat diuers, agayne in this for that Phaeton taking his fathers chariot, for his presumption was drenched in the Sea, this younge gentleman was preserued in the Sea, as betokeninge some greater secrecie in Nature. Armineo was best apayed to haue the companie of so excellent a gentleman for the Prince Clauergudo. Now by y^e way this may you learne, y^t although they could not tell Donzels name, yet by the tokens he had vppon him, they named him the gentleman of the Sunne, somewhat in other tearmes in the Persian tongue, but in signification, all one with the name that his mothers gentlewoman gaue him in Hungary beeing worth the markinge that both Persians and Hungarians shoulde so iumpe in naminge him. But to make hast homewardes they tooke the way to Phygia, and with a good winde ere .xv. dayes they landed there, and comming a shore, they sente harbengers aforehande, as well to aduertise the Souldan and Lyrgandeo of the Princes comming  as to puruaye by the waye, of lodginge for the estates. The two young gentlemen being not a little welcome vnto Florions two vnckles, as you may reade in the next Chapter.¶ Prince Florion with the two young gentlemen entered into Babilon, and were there honourably receiued by the Souldan. Cap. 18THe prince Florion néeded not to haue giuē intelligence to y^e Souldan of his comming, for y^e wise Lyrgandeo opened all which had chaunced, as well as if he had bene a partie to the dooinge of it. So when the Prince was in lesse then a halfe dayes iourney from the citie, the Souldan and hys wise brother Lyrgandeo, issued out with a great traine to receiue him, and comming néere, the wise Lyrgandeo espying Florion with y^e gentleman of the Sunne on his horse before him, in great ioy rode a pace, & taking him in his armes, spoke these woords. O ye souereigne Gods, immortall thancks be giuen vnto you for the high fauour you haue shewed vnto vs, in bringing into our power this rare gentleman with whom you haue imparted of your most secret graces. O that mine armes coulde once merite such an heauenly burden. O how well may Babilon reioyce sith he is thether brought, whose glory shall no lesse glister through the earth, then the bright Sunne shineth in the world. Who deserueth to haue his biding amonge the demigods for his valour and mightinesse. "O how he shal race out the memorie of Ninus and Xerxes, and all the pride of the Assirian monarches. From hence foorth Assiria, for béeing onely the cradell of this gentlemans nourserie shall be famous throughout the whole world: from hence foorth men shall haue so much to doe, to put in writing the worthinesse of this gentleman, that all the monuments of our auncestors shal quite die, and this man onely shall be our tabletalke." The wise man thus as it were rauishe, and vttering his conceiptes in greate gladnesse by interbreathinges, the beautie of the chylde sometimes amasing him, and his diuinitie astonishing the hearers, he kissed the young gentleman & held him in his

handes till the Souldan drew néere, as y^e Souldan approched, he deliuered Donzel del Febo vnto him, & tourned himself towards Clauergudo embrasing him goodly but in more modestie of speach or lesse delight, he said vnto him. "You are welcome noble and souereigne prince, I knowing howe well knowne your name should be in in y^e world, had great desire to see you, albeit, it shall be some griefe vnto your parents not to enioy your presence, the time shall come when you shall giue them greater comfort and pleasure. In the meane time, you shall not lose any thing in béeing brought vp in the company of this gentleman, whom you shall loue so excéedingly, that his loue shall often extinguish the remēbraunce of your parents." Armineo which was not farre off, gaue him great thanckes in the behalfe of the Prince. Then they two rode together deuising of many things, and many courteous woordes of good entertainement passing betwéene them, vntil y^e Souldan fell in talke with the young Clauergudo & Armineo to whom he shewed a friendly countenaunce in token of great good loue. These things thus done, they all held on their way to y^e citie, & passing through towards y^e pallaice, there they were receiued by Balisea, princesse and wife to Florion, making semblaunce of great liking to Donzel del Febo, whose excellent beautie and comlinesse she wel noted, and already concluded in hir thought for a companion to hir sonne now of thrée yeare olde very large and beautifull called Brandizel: Which in déede after proued a knight so good, as fewe better, béeing strong made, somewhat higher then his father, & of more puissaunce. These thrée gentlemen by the Princesse Baliseas deuice were brought vp altogether in like suites, and like exercises, & so from their youth their friendship encreased with their yeares, that in the ende, as they themselues were at their full growth, so their friendship waxed so firme, y^t neither the diuersitie of thir  professions, nor the distaunce of their coūtreys might in any wise enfringe it. These young gen-

tlemen thus brought vp in Babilon, Armineo which in al things was very wise & well learned, taught Clauergudo the liberall Artes, and instructed him in the true & perfect lawe of God: in such manner that although his education was among the Pagans, yet the Prince was alwaies a good christian. The wise Lyrgandeo likewise carefull of the gentleman of the Sunne, & of Brandizel, read vnto them diligently what was cōuenient, saue that as he was a Pagan, so hee acquainted them onely with Pagansie in their religion: Which errour notwithstanding afterwarde they both renounced. This was the trayning vp of the young princes in the court of the Souldan, as héedfully looked vnto, as if it had bene in their parents courtes. But as their yeares multiplied, so they excéeded, all other inferior in iudgment, wit, discretion, goodlinesse of stature, actiuitie, and al that which was requisite to such princes, but especailly and aboue all his equales, Donzel del Febo surpassed. For atteining to the age of x. yeares, hee séemed to bee more then xv. both for witte and strength, courage and policie, and by the bignesse of his body (béeing withal well featured) men gathered vndoubtedly of his might. They made their argument thus. If he be so strongly set in his youth at x. yeares, what will he bée at xx. And truely although his father the Emperour Trebatio was big of body, as the historie hath already specified, béeing .viii. foot in height, yet Donzel del Febo ouerreached him somewhat, & with al this mainteined y^e prerogatiue of his proportiō. So y^t I thinck our painters as well Grecians as Assirians had neuer the perfect knowledge to drawe and finish y^e true proportion of man, before they had the view of this knight. His picture was sent into sundry parts as y^e noblest paintur y^t ere was wrought. Besides this, ther appered in his face a maiestie so graue & princelike, y^t it stroke a feare of him into mighty Princes. For all this, he was yet of behauiour affable & somewhat familiar, y^t he which knew[∗]"knew" in catchphrase only.
him well, albeit his mortall enimie could not but highly commend of it. What shal I say? as the Adamant stone draweth to it the hard and sharpe yron by his hidden vertue, so likewise this knight procured the loue, as well of foes as of friendes, and of as many as knewe him and were conuersant with him. And so this younge gentlemen Clauergudo and Brandizel, and other younge gentlemen which were his playfellowes were so gladde of him, that they could at no time be without him. Nowe bicause we haue more perticulerly to descende into this storie hereafter, and to describe the manifolde graces of this knight, for these matters we will let them passe at this time, and remember you of his age of xij. yeares, at which time there happened that which shall appeare in the Chapter following.¶ The deliuerie of the Souldan by the gentleman of the Sunne. Cap. 19.MAny times the Souldan and the Prince Florion, with some other knightes for their recreations, rode on hunting into a thicke wood standing in a faire forest seated somewhat néere the Sea, and plentifull of all kinde of game, especailly of wilde boares and such like beastes. Nowe when the young gentlemen could sit their horses and were able to endure some trauaile, they tooke them with them, and furnishing them with boare speares in their handes, they appointed them to the chase. Some game ther was killed before them, wherin they toke great pleasure: but especially y^e gentleman of y^e Sunne, which by himself wearied a wilde beare, & two boares so féerce as might haue frayed a right good knight. His practise was alwayes to hunt alone, to haue no mans helpe to the encounter with any wilde beast. And it was so, y^t one day the Souldan would go to the same forest to delight himselfe, there for certeine dayes taking with him the Prin-

cesse Balisea his daughter, and the traine of many Ladyes and gentlewomen and the most principall Lordes of his courte, biscause the place was gallant and delectable, and replenished with variety of game, being as I sayd hard vpon the cliffes of the Sea. For this cause there were rered vp many pauilions there, and there was puruayed of other prouision necessary for the housholde. He made his owne tent to tbe pitched in a flourishing medowe next to a goodly fountaine. Ther rested he one day solacing him selfe among his knights, for the first day they wente not out to séeke their game. The next day earely in the morning the Prince Florion, the young gentlemen and the most part of all the knights tooke their way through the forest climing vp a stéepe hyll, and parted themselues into diuers companyes, some to rayse the game, and others to be at the receipte. The Souldan and the Princesse with hir Ladyes, and only xv. knights remaining in their tents as vnmindefull of any daunger if any shoulde happen. The Sunne being almost at the highest and his beames more direct, the Souldan with the Princesses his daughter and hir gentlewomen lefte their tent and came to the fountaine the water being cléere and the place well shadowed with trees, there in the quyet shade to abide the comming of the Prince Florion and the young gentlemen to dinner. In the meane time the gentlemen sewers prepared the cupboorde and the cookes made ready for dinner. The tables being spredde vpon the greene grasse and euery man attentiue to his function, the officers to their charge, the knights to their game, and the Souldan with the Princesse and Ladyes to refreshe themselues in the coole ayre: there came in place a mightie and wofull Gyant, with more then twentie knyghts after him. The Ladyes scréeched out, but ther was no remedy. For the Gyant with his knights toke the Souldan, the Princesse, and most of the gentlewomen and conuayed them into a chariot drawne by strong horses which they brought with 

them for the same purpose, with the outcries of the Ladyes the knights which were in the text issued and séeing their Lord and the Princesse with hir Ladyes so carryed away perforce (albeit this they did more for shame then through hardinesse, yet) they made towardes the Gyant with their swordes and began to compasse him about, but they so ill perfourmed their duetie that in short time them selues were either wounded, slaine, taken, or put to flight, and their Lord for lacke of rescewes was bound and fettered. The Gyant hauing his praye withall the hast he might tooke towarde the Sea, where he had a good shippe in redinesse. The lamentable noyse which the Ladyes made was such that it beat through y^e ayre vnto y^e skyes and yet could not penetrate so farre as to Prince Florion or his knights, either that they wer so eager in the pursute of their wilde boares that they marked it not, or that the crye of the hunters was so lowde, that it drowned the other. But the young gentleman of the Sunne, losing his company, and well mounted vpon a lyght horse with a borespeare in his hand, being also clothed in a hūters wéed of gréene cloth of golde, and a hat to kéepe downe his yelowe haires, roade roming about the woode to séeke some beast vpon whom he might try the stéele of his boarespeare, and taking his way and that way without staying in any place, he mette with a knight sore wounded by the Gyant, which roade piteously to call the Prince Florion and his knights for succour to the Souldan & the Princes. As Donzel del Febo saw him thus arayed he asked what he ayled. "Alas gentleman of the Sunne said y^e knight, y^e Souldan our Lord and the Princesse are taken prisoners by an vgly & monstrous Gyant, & by the hast he maketh, I gesse he is already néere the Sea." The gentleman of the SUnne much lamented such newes, & with a noble & heroycall courage which by nature nowe enforced it selfe forward, he prayed y^e knight to guide him on y^e way, towards y^e Gyant. The knight thinking it an vnfit match &

beside his purpose to turne back with him, for he thought him to young for such an enterprice would not staye, but rode on faster. The gentleman moued with this that the knight set so little by him yet said nothing, but not tarying for more company broched the horse with his spurs, y^t he made him spin y^e same way in which he had sene y^e knight before. The hast he made is incredible, for before y^e Gyāt had recouered y^e sea, he ouertooke him in a playne amonst his knights & the chariot in y^e midst. The Gyāt was hindmost on foot, with a great battell axe of stéele in his hand so y^t it might haue dismayed one to sée his fierce & cruell demeanour. When y^e gentleman of y^e sunne had got a sight of him with greater force then before he spurred his horse making way through y^e gréene medow as fast as if he had bene driuen by the rage of tempest & thunder, and crying aloude. "Stay, stay." The Gyant and his knights hearing the noyse that he made and the sound of the horse féet galloping in such hast, turned their heades aside to sée what it ment, & amongst the rest y^e Souldan likewise looked behinde him, and espying him to be y^e gentleman of y^e sunne with only a boarespeare in his hand, he much pitied hys case, for he thought surely Donzel should neuer escape death or duraunce. The lothsome Gyant wondering at the young gentleman comming toward him, with great fury lifte vp both his hands to his head, and there staying on foote as he was, made a fierce and sterne countenaunce of disdayne till the young gentleman approched. But the noble & valyant Donzel del Febo borne for the achieuement of greater aduentures, with a furious moode as it had bene thunder drew nere, and with his boarespeare in his hande being very strong, sharp, and well stéeled with all his force he shoued it into y^e breast of the Gyant, that although he had a breastplate of fine steele a finger thicke yet the speare entred, and issued out at y^e shoulder all begored with bloude. Thus the Gyant fell downe deade on the grounde to the greate abashement of all those

which saw him, iudging that Donzel del Febo had bene then let downe from heauen to doe this feate, for in their fancies, not the thunderbolte which by the renting of the cloudes driueth the windes before it, might euer giue a more sodayne or more forcible blowe then that which Donzel del Febo gaue the Gyant, espcially the knights of the Gyants retinue not witting who he was, imagined that their owne gods had sent him downe from the heauens for the more notable chastisement of their Lordes crueltie. Now some of the knights hearing a rushing, a farre off in the woode, and thincking it to be the Souldans people, their maister thus slayne, without hauing care of chariot or prisoners, tooke them to their héeles with more hast by halfe then good spéede. For one letting the bridell slippe, and for feare not able to guide his horse, by the stumbling of his horse had so sore a bruse, that his horse rising, he laye still on the ground tormented with the fal. And those which got to the Sea, themselues being past daunger nothing sorowed at the death of the Gyant, for they hated him, & serued more by compulsion then with good will. This trouble in the Gyantes men made the gentleman of the Sunne make no account of them. Wherefore alighting from his horse, he went towardes the chariotte where the Souldan was, with the Princesse and Ladyes and vnbounde them. The Ladyes when they sawe him, were no lesse gladde of the proofe of armes in Donzel del Febo, then of their owne deliuerie. But the Souldan embrasing him & kissing him with great loue, sayd vnto him."Oh my sonne now I know assuredly that the mightie gods highly fauour you, & that onely by miracle you haue ben brought to Babilon as to giue succours to me & to my children. Now doe I firmely beleue my brother Lyrgandeo, who long before prophecied of the great meruailes of your valour, sith that being so young and tender and in the maydenhead of your strength, it being neuer before

tasted vpon an enemye, you haue begunne so well as I haue knowne no knight in his perfection machable. And truly this is the accomplishment of your first aduenture, as my brother foreseeing it tolde me, that you should rescew me and my daughters from death or imprisonment, and I hope as well in the immortall gods y^t the second shalbe lykewise finished, that is, the kingdome of Persia so long withhelde by the false vsurper, may by you be redelyuered to the Prince Florion. My Lord aunswered Donzel del Febo, I haue not as yet done the thing in your service neither in my lyfe may hope to compasse which may counterpaize with my good wil in this behalfe, and truely the duetie which I owe to your good grace my Lorde, to the Prince Florion, and to my Lady the Princesse your daughter, dayly so augmenteth as more then that duetie I cannot owe vnto my father, to the discharge whereof, notwithstanding I stande bounden to your goodnesse, not onely of courtesie but in conscience," and so humbled himselfe before the Souldan: but the Souldan againe embraced him and they two helped the Ladyes out of the chariot. The Ladyes were desirous to know who the Gyant was, & what should be the cause why he so assayled them. Therfore the Souldan and the gentleman of the Sunne, made toward the knight of the Gyant which was falne to the grounde, and as they tooke of his helmet to giue him ayre, they fetcht him out of his sounde and setting him on his feete they demaunded of him who the Gyant was and why he came to take them prisones. The knight seing it behoued him to say the troth made aunswer shortly thus. "You shall vnderstande my Lordes that this Gyant was called Brandafileo Lorde of the toured Ilande, which is in the great Ocean, at the mouth of the redde Sea. This Ilande is so stronge and inuincible that being within he néede not feare all the worlde if they had bent their force against him, & being proude vpon the safetie of this Ilande he did much wrong to the nations round

about him spoyling and robbing all Arabians, Aethiopians, Aegyptians, and the Garamants of Inde, and finally so many as he might come by in the great west seas, and so the Ilande of Traprobne, and by long continuaunce in this trade of rouing he is become so rich of captiues and treasure that no Ilande is comparable with his. Now the cause wherfore he came into this your lande was, for that in the time y^t the mightie Orixerges your father reigned in Persia the father of this Gyant called Briontes then being Lorde of the toured Ilande, by occasion of Briontes euill life, your father and he fell at variaunce, wherefore the king your father sent out his whole nauy to subdue this Ilande but being not able to conquer it, he gaue them notwithstanding in charge to lye in the outcréekes awaiting when he came foorth from the Iland & so to set vpon thē. One time y^e Gyant making a road out for a lyke cheuisaunce a farre off from his owne Iland, the king your father dogged him with his shippes, and as he retonrned met him in y^e halfe tourne & (for all the hauocke he and his made of your fathers souldiers) in the ende killed him. This Brandafileo his sonne then being a childe of tender age, yet so soone as he was of yeares to be made knight he greatly longed after y^e reuenge of his fathers death, & bicause he coulde not worke his mischiefe on y^e king Orixerges being then deade, at the least it would case his stomacke, if he might wreake himselfe on you his sonne, and for this cause many times he hath sente spyes into your lande to be aduised by them when he might haue opportunitie of vēgeāce, & learning of your cōming to this forrest for your disport, he hath now layne more then a mōth in secret expectatiō of so good lucke as to take your persō. This time he had found to his contentation had not thys gentleman bene, who now hath made sufficient paye to Brandafileo for his months hire." This is all my Lorde which I can tell you as to your demaunde, and it is truth which I haue tolde you, as I certeinely beleue, that if euer

he had cleane carried you from hence you should not haue esaped from death or bondage, for so he had determined. The Souldan mused at y^t which y^e knight had told him, and waying y^e great daunger wherin he was like to haue faln, he ceased not to giue thancks to his gods & to the gentlemā of y^e sunne for his safetie. At this time Prince Florion came with more then .xxx. knightes running their horses so fast as they might, bicause already they had heard the newes, & comming where y^e Gyant lay dead, viewing well the wide & mortall wound, they highly commended of it, and coulde not iudge by whom he had receiued it: but very ioyfull to sée y^e Souldan & his Princesse out of daunger, leaping from their horses they came towards them. Then Florion excusing his long absence by y^e ignoraunce of the fact, desired to knowe who he was which had so gently bayled them from y^e Gyant. The Souldan aunswered on this sort. "Ah, FlorionFlorion, now we know your vnckle Lyrgandeos diuinations, as touching this gentleman of the sunne to be sooth and stedfast, for we haue well aproued his valour, & know you y^t he alone, being y^e only man which came to succour vs brought to grounde the Gyant Brandafileo by one only blowe with his boarespeare, riuetting as you sée his coatearmour, and ridding vs from so daungerous a foe, making his entrance to knighthood y^e strangest y^t euer was heard. Florion giuing back either as wōdring or not credeting  his vnckles speach, was still vrged by y^e Souldan who tolde on forward as Brandafileos knight had cōfessed. Floriō yet as it wer halfe in a māmering which part to take betwen y^e gētlemās youth & his courage disputed rather y^e impossibiliitie by means of y^e hugenes of y^e Gyant, his strong armour, & the number of his knights, in y^e ende he ouercame himselfe, by remēbraunce of Lyrgandeos report, & thancked the gentleman on this wise. "O my right noble & beloued sonne, I graunt that not my force, but the mightie windes and swelling waues by the ordinaunce of my Gods, haue gyuen me

power ouer you, for that by your souereigne bountie the wronge which is done to me by the tyrant shalbe reuenged, and I shall recouer mine owne kingedomme. O how happy was the day and the houre fortunate in which I found you, sith my gods haue reserued you for so great benifites towardes me and the relese of mine vnckle," with these and many other words Florion wept for great pleasure to thincke of Donzels magnanimitie. And in this time the other young gentlemen his companions came riding from hunting, and sawe the fierce Gyant lye dead by the way they enquired after the manner of his death and hearing it to be as you haue heard, y^e one tooke great pleasure in it, and the other with an honest emulation of the fact wishing it to himselfe, according to the diuersitie of the good will they bare vnto the gentleman of the sunne. Then they came altogether to their tents, where they made but a hunters breakefast, for ere dinner was halfe done the Souldan commaunded to horse to retourne to Babilon, and so they all on horseback the Princesse and hir gentlewomen on their palfrayes, & the lustie knights on their sturdy Rounceualls, tooke the way towards the citie, laying the mightie Gyant vpon a horse, his head and feete trayling on the grounde.When they were within the gates of the citie, all that which had happened being published, all the citizens and other of the courte wer in countrary arguments about the hugenesse of the Gyant and the courage of the gentleman of the Sunne thinking it an impossible matter to be brought about by one of so few yeares. But from that time foorth, (although before likewise they loued him) yet nowe they made much more of him, and the Souldan with the Princesse and all the courtiers helde him in great account alwaye. Notwithstanding the report of men, and the high extolling of his actes to his owne face, the gentleman of the Sunne kept the same tenour of life, not bearing himselfe any thing vpon his good fortune, but rather

as the windes encreased which promised him safetie & honour, and as his fame was more blased, so he stroke hys sayles & became more lowlier. This his humilitie made him much more to be loued, as the sprinckling of water augmenteth the flame in a smithes forge: Clauergudo at this time egged on by Donzels good hap, and béeing of riper yeares sued to be made knight. But the wyse Lyrgandeo foreséeing somewhat, and to haue him kéepe company with Donzel del Febo, and Brandizel withstood his purpose for that time. Clauergudo was but about .xiiij or xv. yeares of age, but he was so comly and nimble in all feates of armes, that there was not a knight in all the court which outpassed him. In this manner were these two gentlemē brought vp in y^e Souldans court, with great magnificence as if they had bene in their fathers courts, & aboue all, they were so throughly enstructed in learning, that ther were none able to come in controuersie with them, al this equal to both, notwithstanding the difference of beléefes which shall be a like ere it be long. Clauergudo which was guided by Armineo his unckle, was a christian: and the gentlemen of the Sunne beléeued in the lawe of the gentils, as the wise Lyrgandeo had taught him. Lyrgandeo himselfe béeing bred and brought vp in the same errour by his father, for all his great cunning was not able to finde out the vanitie of hys false Gods. O the prouidence of God howe much be wée bound to thée, and howe ill doe wée acknowledge thy great goodnesse in suffering vs to be become christians, when thousandes wise men and myghtie monarches dye in y^e lawe of the gentils, not all their power auaileable to saue their soules, and their learning not worth a rushe for the displaying of the falshoode of that lawe, wherein their Fathers haue nousled them. And shall wee Christians thincke that our knowledge can pull vs out of hell, if not the wysest of the earth, I meane the learned gentils could once reproue their owne lawe

and knowe the onely and true God. As for example this Lyrgandeo was so wise and well learned, that not Artimedoro, nor Rogel, nor Turke, nor Sarasin, nor Iewe nor Christian came euer néere him, and yet biscause hée had learned that lawe from his cradell, and wanted the gifte of God for the true vnderstanding of his will, he wallowed still in his errour, as y^e soowe doth in the myre, till God hauing a regard of the gentleman of the Sunne, and minding to make him a true christian, did by his meanes conuert the wise Lyrgandeo to the knowledge of this wyll, and poure out his grace aboūdantly vpon the whole kingdome of Persia, according as more largely shall bée recited. But to retourne, the two younge gentlemen, albeit contrary in professions, yet in friendshippe and good will were conformable, as shall bée declared in this storie.¶ An aduenture in the court of the Souldan, which befel to the young gentleman of the Sunne. Cap. 20.THe Souldan and the Prince Florion with all the knightes of his courte, greatly prayed their Gods that the gentleman of the Sunne might come to his full age to bee made knight, for that onely they stayed their voiage into y^e kingdome of Persia, for his cause as willing to haue him with them for y^e great prowesse which rested in him, and they thought their stay not ouerlong, séeing it was not vnlikely that whiche the wise Lyrgandeo prophecied of him, that he should bee a valiant knight, and that without him their enteraunce into Persia were to small effect. For this cause, they employed their care in the aduauncing forwarde of the gentleman of the Sunne. This gentleman now being of the age of xvj. yeares, was so high and well fashioned that he wanted little stature of any man. One day Prince Florion with many other knights being abroad at y^e riuer to flye at a fowle, the young gentleman staying in the pal-

laice. The Souldan with many of his knyghtes and gentlewomen toke their pastime in one part of his great pallaice where entred in at y^e gates sixe auncient knights with white beardes hanging downe to the gyrdlestéedes, and all armed saue the headpéeces, compassing on eache side a gentlewoman fayre and young, clothed al in mourning apparel, and hauing a crowne of golde vpon hir head. This Lady was led by a knight great of body well and strongly proportioned, and armed at all pointes with a rich and strong armour. This knight lifting vp the visor of his helmet, shewed himselfe to the Souldan, where they perceiued his face to be very foule and fearefull, of coloure more tawnie and sunburnt, then cole blacke, hys eyes flaminge in his heade, his nostrels wide and large, broade lippped, and his sharpe fanges issuing out of his mouth like boares tuskes, and reaching to his chinne, so that there was no man liuinge but might haue bene afraied of hys fierce semblaunce. But besides this, hee was so highe that there was not any in that place whom this knight excéeded not two spanfulles at the least, and in makinge of his body he was so large and well quartered, more them the compasse of two knightes. Hauinge thus entered and sette himselfe to viewe, those which were present had inough to occupie their eyes, either on the uglinesse of the Gyant, or the beautie of the gentlewoman. But the gentlewoman kneeled before the Souldan to haue kissed his hands. But the Souldan taking hir by the hand, raised hir vp dooing hir the honour hee thought it conuenient, in that she appeared to be a Lady of greate byrth. Shee with teares distilling downe from hir beautifull eyes, and wateringe hir crimson cheekes, spake vnto the Souldan on thys wise. "The heauenly and immortall Gods mainteine and encrease thy highe estate most puissaunt and mtghtySouldan of Babilon. Know for certeintie y^e vncerteine fortune neuer constant to any, hath in such maner shewed hir

selfe cruell and aduerse to mee, that shée onely not suffised with the death which my father and mother, and many of their subiectes haue receiued for my sake, she ceaseth not dayly to afflict me, and to bring me to so lowe an eb, that being defeated of mine owne inheritaunce, I am yet faine to wander through the courtes of mightie princes to finde some good and pitifull knight, which bewaylinge my mishap, will ease me of the great trauaile I dayly take to saue my honour. For if you will suffer me to lay open my case, the whole storie is thus. I am right enheretrix of y^e Iland of Cypres, where my predecessors reigned long time with much ioy, vntill that their good hap was hindred by my beautie. For hauing brought me into thys world, with y^e beautie wherin you see me, which I would to our gods had either perished when I first was swadled, or els had neuer bene knowen, that none might haue taken delight in it, so soone as my beautie was sounded abroad, this knight heere present, king of the Zardians, Lord of the Iland of Zardia called Raiartes, hearing of it came to sée me, and so soone as he came, he was taken with my loue, and demaūding me for wife, was denied it of my father. Wherfore very angry retourning to his Iland of Zardia, with a great army of knights he came against my father, & at the first field killed him and murthered al his people, and in short time became Lord of Cypres, my mother séeing my father dead, and hir land wasted, dyed for griefe. I remained alone without company till suche time as Raiartes came to the pallaice where I was. I knew to whose power I was become seruaunt, & fearing that he would haue forced me, determined by endinge my life to make my selfe frée from his subiection, estéeming it farre better to die with my parentes, then aliue to bewaile their deathes, and hauing no better leasure nor meanes to achieue my purpose, I leaped vp to a window  the highest in all the pallaice, thence to haue throwne my selfe downe, if Raiartes seing me in this plight had not

prayed me not to doe it, promising if I forbeare that, to doe the thing that I commaunded him. I resoluing vpon death told him y^t vnlesse he graunted me one gift, I would be mine owne executioner: he to saue my life, promised it wherby I left off from putting y^t in practise which I had contriued in my thought. By this meanes Raiartes had me in his power, & hauing the whole Iland at his commaundement, hee carryed me contrary to my will into his owne countrey, with these aged knightes my néere knsmen, there he requested me of loue, and praied me to accept of him for husband. What should I doe he was importunate in his demaund, & I remained in his daunger so that to put by the execution of his desire, I had none other remedy but to aunswer him that so soone as he had performed the promise which he made mée, I woulde satisfie his whole entent. This hearing he was wel content, and so I tolde him that hee should carry me for the space of a xij. month into all places whether I would, & if in the meane time I founde a knight to defende my right by fighting against him, he should graunt the battaile with condition, that if my knight vanquished him, I should be frée frō his demaund, and my land at quiet, otherwise if he had the vpper hand, I from thence foorth to be at his commaundement, and he doe what euer liked him. This knight most noble Souldan, counselling with his strength, and thicking all mens vertues inferiour to his, tooke vpon him the quest, glad by such meanes to manifest his power, and so he carryed me from the Iland Zardia, more then halfe a yeare past, in which time yet I haue not founde a knight to vndertake my quarell, and yet I haue bene in the courtes of mightie kings, and other great Lordes. Now séeing the terme sette betwéene vs is more than halfe expired, for my laste refuge hether am I come to thy court to proue if heere my good fortune should be such that I should finde in it that which I haue so long sued for in other courts. Heere she

ended with sighes and sobs out of measure, thereby vttering the sorrow she had in hir heart, and the griefe for to loue such a knight, which moued great compassion in both Souldan and others of his companie. But there was no knight which woulde aunswere for the Princesse Radamira, that was hir name, and yet there were many in the Souldans presence. Then in great pride and with a féerce looke this terrible Raiartes spake vnto hir. "What knight is there in the world so foole hardy and presumptious Radamira, which for thy cause durst enter listes with me, yea, be it that both right nad iustice were right and cléere on his side, and art thou not quite deuoide of reason to leue vndone, that which I beséech thée besides valewing thy beautie with my brauery, and thy pride with my puissance, I shall seeme to set to lowe a price on my selfe if I enioye thée, & if ther be any knight here which will say y^e contrary, I wil soone make him recant his folly." Raiartes hauing said thus, knit his browes and made such a grimme countenaunce that all they feared him which behelde him, and ther was not a knight ther so hardy as to aunswere any thing in the Princesse Radamiras behalfe, as if it had bene méere sinne in a gentlewoman straungers right, to hazard their person vpon a diuell rather than vpon an humaine creature. Euery man was still to the no little griefe of the Souldan in that his court receiued such disgrace, but the gentleman of the Sunne sitting by and moued with compassion towards the gentlewoman, arose on his féete, and made aunswere to Raiartes, saying. "Sir knight it is a great blasphemy to knighthoode, to say that in the whole world there is not a knight which dare fight with thée. Thy lye is loude, and thou doest against all reason enforce this princesse to marry thée. Be thou sure that if I were a knight I would suffer a thousande deathes rather then such reproach should be offered to a gentlewoman. For thy browne beautie is not fitte to be hir playfellowe," and saying thus hee set himselfe downe agayne. Raiartes
madde angry for these woordes, tourning towardes him, and rolling his eyes with greate rage, aunswered. "If thou wert as stronge as thou art foolishe, thou weake younlinge, I woulde make thy life and thy woordes ende at one time. But they say commonly, that women and those which are not able to weare armour, as priuiledged for their speach: and maye talke without controlment," and so Raiartes lefte him. But the couragious gentleman not béeinge able to beare that contumely, in his anger rose from where he sate, and comming to the Souldan knéeled before him beséeching his grace to graunte this, one suite, the firste which in his life time he had made. The Souldan little thinckinge what he would aske, and louing him so well, that what thing he demaunded, it should haue ben graunted, willingly sayd, yea, and bad him say on what it was that he desired. The gentleman of the Sunne sayd, "my Lord, y^t which I require is, that you make me knight, bicause it is highe time that I receiue it. I doe not thincke my selfe so young as to put vp wrong at any mans hande." Those which were present,were much troubled at the request of the gentleman of the Sunne, foreséeing the ende which was to aunswere the bolde Raiartes, & the Souldan was greatly sorie to haue bene so rash in making promise before he had knowen his suite, wherefore he sate still without speaking, yea, or no, diuising onely, how to satisfie the young gentleman, and to quite himselfe of his promise. The gentleman of the Sunne douting least the Souldan woulde linger and delay the time very augerly sayd vnto him. "If I can not obteine this at your hands my Lord, I sweare by the high Gods that during my life I shall not bée mery, and I will goe serue some other Lorde which more liberally will consider of my requestes." The great Souldan loth to disquiet the gentleman of the Sunne whome hée sawe attent vppon this matter, albeit is promise gréeued him much, aunswered him thus sayinge.

"Assuredly Donzel del Febo, if you had demaunded any other thing of me more profitable for your selfe, doubt you not but you had bene in possession of your desire by thys time, yea, had it bene the greatest part of my kingdome. But bicause I sée you are of tender years, & that the time is not yet for you to support the burthen of armour, I would with you to refraine and let fall your suite for this time, or if you will not otherwise be perswaded, holde you, I yéeld vnto you, watch this night in your armour, and to morrowe at day breake I will giue you the order." The gentleman of the Sunne tooke him at y^e woord, & very ioyfully kissed the Souldans hand for his gracious fauour. Then foō thence by soft paces, cōming to Raiartes, he sayd vnto him. "Nowe y^t I haue license to parle with thée as a knight, I will aunswere thee Raiartes, to the woordes which thou hast sayd vnto me, and so I tell thée that if the Princesse Radamira, will put hir quarell into my handes, I will defend hir right, and take the battayle vpon mée, and be it that the Princesse Radamira dare not commit hir right vnto me, yet I say, that to be auenged on thy reprochfull speaches which thou hast blowed foorth, I willl fight with thée, and make thée to knowe that thou art more vniust and foolish, then valiant and courteous, as knightes ought to bée." The gentleman of the Sunne here ended, and the grimme sier Raiartes began a laughter with these woordes. "In déede if all folly were force, many knights were couragious & strong, for most of thē are to too ventions, and if thy selfe wert of as great habilitie as thou art of forwardnesse, the Princesse Radamira should ende hir quarell by to morrowe night, but thou deceiuest thy selfe, and albeit I am halfe ashamed to take the battaile against a knight neuer before acquainted with armour, yet biscause thou shalt not want due correction for thy follie, I accept the battaile which thou offerest, as well for the one cause as for the other." As this talke was at the hottest betwéene them, the princesse Radamira
behelde the gentleman of the Sunne very earnestly, noting as well his yeares as his person, and albeit he was then beardlesse. Yet she thus conceiued of him that he was of noble courage, and very stronge, and besides this ther appeared in his face somewhat which she iudged more than manlike. And as she was wise, so hir heart gaue hir that this younge gentleman had some diuine bloude in him which she thought to haue discended from some of hir false Gods. So neither lightly nor wantonly mouing but with great discreation and wisedome standing in y^e same place, & musing what she ought to do in y^e ende, no other knight answering y^e challenge for hir, not altogether out of hope, shee agreede to put hir quarrell into his handes by deliberate counsayle, concluding, if hee were murthered hir selfe to followe after, and so she spake to the Gyant on this wise. "Raiartes sithe this gentleman with so good will profereth himselfe to maintaine my right against thée, I am very well content to put my quarrell into his handes, and from this time foorth I will not séeke other knight." The beautiful princesse Radimira doing thus, the fierce Raiartes was sore moued to sée that she made so little account of him, and so much trusted the boldenes of the young gentleman, and foming at the mouth lyke a wylde boare he was not able to speake one word for the fury and choller which boyled in him. The gentleman of the Sunne thancked hir goodly for the acceptation of his paines in hir name. In this manner the battell was put off till the next day, but the gentleman of the Sunne was not so glad, to haue occasion offered to be made knight, as the Souldan and his friends were sorrowefull, to haue him fall into this daunger, which they imagined to be to too sure, bicause of the strength of Raiartes, and the youth of the gentleman of the Sunne. They thought it a desperate case for him to wage this battayle, with the sauegarde of his honour. Then the young gentleman Clauergudo being of more

yeares then Donzel del Febo was, repended that hée had not aunswered for the Princesse, both bicause he thought it a blemish in his honour to haue excused himselfe from such a matter, and his age was more then Donzel del Febos was, and so might better acquite himselfe against the force of Raiartes, & especially fearing the perill of his friende, he would néedes haue taken the battayle out of his hands, but perceiuing the vnwillingnesse of the gentleman of the Sunne he would speake no more in it. At sunne set Florion came from hunting, and hearing of the battayle which was appoynted he was very sad for Donzel de Febos sake, bicause of Raiartes force, and Donzels weakenesse, and so he tooke vpon him to perswade Donzel del Febo to giue ouer the battayle, and put it vppon some other in his right if it so pleased him. But Florion & Clauergudo wer both beguyled in Donzel del Febo, albeit either of thē wer such knights as if y^e one hath ben rehersed & of y^e other shalbe shwered you hereafter. Raiartes was strōg as his lyke scarcely among y^e Pagans, & it might be it woulde ill haue proued with them two, as a man would haue sworne it only by y^e tenour of Raiartes countenaunce, no man beholding him but wyth the same good wyll which they beare vnto the Diuill. And if Florion and Clauergudo desired this battayle it is to be thought it sprang of theire loue towardes Donzel del Febo rather then of auy comforte theire courage gaue them to winne honour in the battayle. But the day was spente, and things necessary for the battayle were in prouiding. At night Lyrgandeo the wise comming from the red Iland, tooke landing at Babilon and méeting with the gentleman of the Sunne he told him y^t many daies had passed since he knew of the conflicte betwene Raiartes and him and therefore had brought certeine armour for him, and so he commaunded his squiers to vntie their two packets, out of one packet Lyrgandeo tooke a white armour wrought with beames of golde descending from his hel-

mette, wherein was grauen a face so faire and shéene, that it shedded out beames as the Sunne, and scarcely for the brightnesse might a man beholde it, and out of the same he tooke out a sworde all garnished with golde and embossed with precious stone, y^e pomell, scabard & chape being so rich and curious, that none there was which praysed not the workemanship. Out of the other packet he drewe out an other white armour pounced with Floure de Luces of golde, and an other swoorde, both which he gaue to Clauergudo, bestowing the other vpon Donzel del Febo. With these good armours the two gentlemen were well apayde, especially the gentleman of the Sunne, whih more estemed of this gifte then of al the segnioryes of the earth: And so he continued his charge for the morrowe battayle, very confident on his owne parte, but to the no little dismaye of his friends, chiefly of the Princesse Balisea which woulde not hys destruction for all hir fathers landes. The Princesse Radamira, in the meane time not fully settled in hir thought droue out y^t night neither merely nor dumpishly, but very heauily as abhoaring nothing so much as y^e company of Raiartes. Hir flesh would tremble often & quake for feare, mistrusting Donzel del Febos good Fortune for y^e perfecting of his charge, his yeres being cleane contrary to al good hope.¶ Donzel del Febo is dubbed knight, and ouercommeth Raiartes. Cap. xxj.THe next daye in the morning, the gentleman of the sunne, with hys rich harnesse buckeled about him, was brought before y^e Souldan & all the knights & gentlemen in y^e court. When he was thus brauely armed he shewed greater and stronger then he dyd vnarmed, & none of them which saw him would haue iudged him of so young years. And when he came before y^e Souldan thus accompanyed w^t all y^e principall knights & gētlemen of y^e court, the

gentleman of the Sunne knéeled downe, and humbly craued to be made knight. The Souldan with teares folowing from his eyes embraced him, greatly reioycing to see him so comly in armour, then taking y^e rich sword which y^e yoūg gentleman helde naked in his hande, he gaue him three blowes on the creste of his helmette, and so sheathing it againe, gyrded it about Donzel del Feboes loynes, and with these wordes blessing him. (The high Gods defend thee with their mightie hande) he bad him arise knyght, and then made hym sweare to the obseruaunce of all the orders of knighthoode, which done the young gentleman kyssed the Souldans hande, and all the hall range with the noyse. Our gods defend the Souldan.This was in the morning but before dinner was cleane done and y^e tables taken vp, the houre was neere wherein they ought to perfourme the battayle, and Raiartes richly armed and mounted vpon his horse trauersed vp and downe before y^e pallayce, wher the Ladyes which were bestowed in the windowes to beholde the fight were afrayd, for in their seeming by the hugenesse of his body and his fierce countenaunce he was the brauest knight in y^e world, &his harnes couered in him y^e deformities of nature. The Princes Radamira in his mourning weede accompanying the Princesse Balisea, was in a great bay windowe, and seeing Raiartes so great, strong, and well horsed, she chaunged hir colour without hope to remoue Raiartes loue, and there fully appoynted wyth hir selfe rather to murther hir selfe then to be in his power, for his filthy and vgly shape was such, that what gentlewoman in the worlde could haue affourded hym for loue?When the Souldan and other knights tooke their seats as iudges of the fielde the Knight of y^e Sunne departing from the pallaice, was conducted by diuers knyghtes to his tent, and there sitting vpon a lustie courser he praunced a whyle before the Souldan, hys horse was all couered

with rich harnesse, in which were enchased sundrye precious stones, all both horse and harnesse of the Souldans gyfte, himselfe being clad with his bright armour his vmberere pulled down, and a mightie speare in his hande, so bigge as they all meruayled at his good making. When Cheualiero del Febo stayed, Raiartes drewe néere, and with a proude voyce sayd vnto him. "Thou presumptious knight, what wouldst thou giue now not to be here alone with me? doest thou not thincke it no wisedome to aduenture thy body wher ther is no hope of safety. Assuredly Raiartes aunswered the Knight of the Sunne, hetherto I haue not séene the thing wherefore I should repent me of my enterprice, and hetherto I haue had more experience of thy vayne and foolish woordes then of thy great and valyaunt prowesse." Raiartes was fel angry at this (the foame staring through his visour) would haue runne vppon the knight, but being awarded by y^e Judges to the lists while the trumpetts sounded, the groned out thus muche to him selfe in the cursing of his Fortune. Oh how doth Fortune enuie my felicitie in prolonging the time thus that I cannot so soone as I wold dispath this wretched knight saying this and somewhat els the trumpetts stayed, and with great rage he ranne towardes the Knighte of the Sunne, but the knighte bearing his shéelde before him, with his speare in his hande met Raiartes with all his force, with the violence of this course, the grounde shooke vnder their horses, and this first iouney brast their great speares into small shiuers. Raiartes with the strong encounntry of the Knight of the Sunne, doubled and fell ouer the arson of the saddle, his horse carying him out of the prease, to blush without company for neuer in his life time had he receiued the lyke blowe. But when he recouered his seate, and saw the Knight of the Sunne not stirred in his saddle, and now with his sword in his hand comming toward him, he drew out his sword which was broad and heauy, in great choller to receiue him, thinking

for a suretie with the edge of his sworde, to supply that which had failed in the poynt of his speare. Both of them madde angry, Raiartes to amend that which he had mard in breaking his speare, and the Knight of the Sunne to reuenge the proude wordes which Raiartes had spoken, their first blowes were such that their pauises wer hewen a sunder, and fell to the ground the other part they after threwe from them and griping their swordes in both their handes, they hitte eache other such blowes vppon the helmette that flakes of fire issued after them. By this time neither of these knights were well pleased with the other, and they let dryue so each at other that in shorte space they made plain their singuler māhoods, & they which sawe it iudged it to be the brauest battayle which they had euer séene betéene two knights. The valiant knights with malicious eies sorrowing each at others welfare, bicause their armour was so good that no swoord would enter, were much more woode laying about thē without order, and caring not where they hit, so they might sée the bloud spin as fast as the sparcles encreased.It was now halfe an houre since the battaile began, and Raiartes well féeling the courage of the knight of y^e Sun, in that he had gotten none aduauntage ouer him in all y^e time. Nowe with what courage foughte he thincke you, béeing besides himselfe for the desire of the Lady, at that time he doubted whether this were the gentleman of the Sunne, whom before he had continued, and if it wer not he, yet he meruailed in himselfe who this valiāt knight might bée, in the mean while y^e Souldan & Florion with all the beholders of the battaile were estonished at the great prowesse and valour which the knight of y^e Sun shewed against Raiartes. They thought truely y^t he would proue the best knight of the world, sith in so tender years he was of great vertue. The Princesse Radamira which loked on this battaile before, halfe against his wil for fear, now viewing how wel hir kngith had behaued himselfe a-
 
gainst hir enemie, with greater ioy and hope she gased on him & often prayed hir gods to graunt him y^e victory. But as I tolde you Raiartes séeing his aduersary so valiantly beare himselfe against him, and not being able to gouerne his ill will he lifte him selfe vp in his stirops and lent the knight of the Sunne a blowe with all his force, that although he could not cut his fine helmette, yet he made him bowe his head to his horsenecke, being blynded with the continuall sparkes of fire which came out of his headpéece. The worthy knight of the Sunne comming agayne to himselfe and sitting surer in this saddle, retourned the lyke blowe to Raiartes, so that Raiartes lost his memorie and receiued an other blowe on his bulke agaynst the saddle bowe, which made the bloud gushe out of his mouth and nostrells, and the Knight of the Sunne followed him to haue vnhorsed him. But Raiartes recouered, and ere the knight of the Sunne coulde hit him, he gaue him on the lefte shoulder a mightie blowe, that with the weight thereof he had falne to the grounde but for the embracing of his horse necke. Againe Donzel del Febo repayed him with a plus vltra, the surplusage more then an ordinary interest, and they wounded each other mangling them selues pitifully, & the clashing of their armour was so great, that it rang lyke bells in all the citie.This was the second houre of the fight, and the mach was equall not being knowne who had the better hand. Raiartes not greatly pawsing, but in his anger reuiling his gods sayd vnto himselfe. "Oh immortall gods, howe little is Raiartes beholding vnto you if a man is able to resist his might? why? if the report of my valyant déedes and noble prowesse made knowne in the heauens causeth you to maligne my state, come you downe and fight with me, for I had rather be vanquyshed by your Deities then to be yelded to mans strength. But what can I thincke, either then that this knighte is one of you, for the loue of Radamira to take hir ryghte

in hande, or at the least some finde of hell in lykenesse of a knight minded to quell me. But seing this is the issue that if I lose the day, I must loose Radamira also, let him winne hir and weare hir, for be he what he may be, he shall get no honour at my hands," and so saying, he stroke his aduersary so sore on the brest, that he brused his curasse and put him in great daunger. Cheualiero del Febo not a little abashed at the great force of Raiartes this being the first battayle that eyer he had fought, thought in himselfe that if all the knights in the worlde were lyke him he should get but small prayse, and therefore to embolden his courage he rating himselfe on thys wise. "Am I he of whome the wise Lyrgandeo hath forefold so much? am I he without whom y^e Babilonians dare not set foote into Persia? am I he for whome they haue thus long time wayted? Certaynly if this be all which I shalbe able to do, shal not all happē cōntrary to y^t which the wise man hath sayd? shall not y^e Babilonians be mocked of their hope? hath not one only knighte much endamaged me? what shall y^e whole multitude of the Persians do, & the puissaunce of y^e Gyants which shal come to assist them? Had it not bene better for my credit not to haue bene borne with so great fame as the Astrologers haue forshewed, then in so short a time so much to be troubled. O Souldan of Babilon and you others which are Judges of the fielde, are you not ashamed of me that in my first battayle, and the first fruites of my knighthoode, I am at the poynt to become recreaunt. But recreaunt I wyl neuer be," and so as it were blowing the coales of his anger, when he was on a light fire he set Raiartes in such a heat, with his thicke and mightie strokes, that the vnlacing of his helme and the vmnaylig of his armour could scare giue him breath inough. Raiartes then thought that his enemyes strength encreased, yet not altogether fowndered, he aunswered him as well as he coulde, that the battayle séemed to be more fierce at that time than at the 

beginning. The houre clock hath smitten three, since they entered the listes, all much meruailing how they were able to endure so long. The Souldan said to Florion & to y^e wise man which sate by, "certeinly if I had not séene with w^t my eyes, I should hardly haue beléeued y^t a knight of so young yeares, as this knight of the Sunne is, might haue had the force so to endaunger a worthy knight, for you knowe howe y^e houres are passed since they began y^e combate, and how yet he abideth many blowes, & still séemes as fresh as he was whē he first came foorth. The wiseman aunswered, yea my Lord, but if you knew with whom he doth fight, you might with more reason meruaile at it. For Raiartes is one of the strongest & worthyest knights that is among the Pagans, and his pride is so great y^t he alone would not refuse to ioyne with an C. knights, and would well thincke to haue the mastery of them all, before hée would be taken." Thus the bench was not idle, & the princesse Radamira very busely attended vpon hir knight, and watched euery tourne, more then halfe ioyfully, speaking thus vnto the Princesse Balisea standing by. "I beléee for a certeintie Princesse Balisea, that our high Gods now at length cloied with my mishaps, haue prouided this knight for me, for in respect of his beautie & great bountie he séemeth rather heauenly then terrestriall. Yea, so I thincke, then aunswered the Princesse Balisea, and that not onely for your succour, but to ayde me and my cause y^e gods haue sent him hether, for by him I looke to be Quéene of Persia. Do you so madame said Radamira, now I pray our gods that he well escape this battaile, to fulfill your heats desire, and truely if he cecome victour, not onely I shall bée auenged on him for my fathers death, but I will make account that I am nowe risen from death to life, for sooner had I purposed to kill my selfe, then to lye in Raiartes armes.But all this while the good knights plyed the combat, fighting couragiously till they were forewearied, euery

one misconstruing the euent. For Raiartes séeing that the longer the battaile lasted, the farther he was from y^e victory, with all the force he might, he stroke the knight of the Sunne such a blowe on the helmet that his sences were bereft him, & had he not taken holde of the saddle bow, he had kissed the ground. So the fray was renued, but the knight of y^e Sunne gaue Raiartes an other blow as strong which bewitched his vnderstanding, for his horse carried him about the field, tossing him on the pomell of his saddle as if he had bene dead. The knight of y^e Sunne thinking it no glory to smite a man halfe beade, pursued him not, but Raiartes reuiuing his face all bloudie, with both his handes, hit the knight of the Sunne vpon the headpéee, that if the helme had not bene the surer, it had riuen him to the belly, but the stroke amased him, & the goare bloud ranne out of his mouth and nostrels, and his horse féeling part of the great blowe carried his master form thence, the good knight lying vpon the crouper of his horse in an extasie as if he had bene quite dead. Raiartes hasted to haue giuen him an other blowe, those which sawe it were very sad, but none were euer so wofully begon, as was the princesse Radamira who with great griefe tourning hir selfe from that sight, and fel on wéeping bitterly. But Raiartes had not followed him iiij. paces with his horse, when the good knight start vp, and féeling his face wet with bloud, in great fury spurred his horse, and met Raiartes with such a blowe, y^t the fine helmet could not denie him passage, but that he cloue Raiartes head in sunder. Heere y^e shute of y^e peole & the princes Baliseas calling hir awaked the princesse Radamira as it had ben out of a sound sléepe, and little looking for so good newes: and the good knight, (Raiartes béeing dead) put vp his swoord into the sheth, and demaunded of the iudges if ther were ought else to do to make the Princesse frée. The Princesse hearde this gladly, and the iudges aunswered hym noe, for that suffised which hée had done. Then with

the noise of instruments, and much honour, the iudges led the knight of the Sunne from that place to the pallaice where with great ioye and pleasure of the Souldan and Florion, hée was well receiued, they shewing as muche good wyll to him, as if they had neuer inoughe in making of him. The gentlemen, Clauergudo and Brandizel, glad of their friends conquest holpe to vnarme him. Then y^e princesse Balisea came & the princesse Radamira dooinge hir duetie to the knight of the Sunne, and as not able else to requite the curtesie he had shewen hir, shée offered to him both hir landes and hir person the better to serue him. Thus they tooke their rest many dayes, and the good knight was much honoured of them all. And there was a great feast made, and diuers iustes and turneys there proclaymed, for the dubbing of Clauergudo and other gentlemen knightes. At this feast, the Prince Clauergudo behaued him best, so that all men iudged him to bée a valiant knight. And after this, the Princesse Radamira minding to retourne, desired a safe conduct of the Souldan, who sent with hir an hundred knights, and other men of warre which sawe hir safely landed in hir countrey, and in full possession of the crowne. For after they knewe that Raiartes was dead, willingly they gaue hir place, and the Princesse remained Lady of it, although not very frée of hir thought from the knight of the Sunne whom she loued so well that in long time she forgate him not. And it fell out so that in the ende shee pleasured hym, wherefore hee gaue vnto hir a myghtie Price for husbande, as shall bée declared héereafter.¶ Africano king of Media and Persia, inferred warre vpon the Souldan of Babilon. Cap. 22.THe historie hath tolde you before y^t the strong & mightie Africano transporting frō Africk into Asia by his

force & valiaunce made himselfe Lord & king of Media, and after entered into the kingdome of Persia, conquered it, and ouerthrew Florion comming to succour his owne people, after which time y^e prince Florion reculing back to Babilon, there remained very sorowful, and without hope to recouer his kingdome. Now the story retourneth to the same Africano, and saith, that when he had appeased the people and brought these two kingdomes in quiet subiection, (as this is an imbecilitie of mans nature, euer coueting to amplifie and enlarge our possessions) so this stoute and proud Pagan not content with that which he had already got by disorder and rapine, he aduentured yet farther to winne Babilon, with all the kingdomes of the Assirians bordering in those parts, reckening himselfe already in possession of them, for the power of the Souldan was in sufficient to repulse his forces, hoping moreouer to ad his dominions, all those countries lying in the coast of the middle earth sea. For this cause he assembled his power as well Medians, as other his subiects. Hauing this great army in a readinesse, yet trusting more in his owne person then in all his people, he tooke the way toward Babilon, minding not to stay till he came néere Babilon. This was some dayes after the combat which the knight had with Raiartes. And as it fell out, it was at the same time as the Souldan and y^e Prince Florion were deuising of y^e order which they should take for the recouer the kingdome of Persia, that the newes came how the puissant Africano was on his way with a huge army toward Babilon, for which cause they were cast into double doubts, seeing that the enimy whom they purposed to finde abroad, came to séeke them at their owne doores. Well with greate care and diligence they began to prepare all things necessarie for the welcomminge of such a ghest, by gatheringe his people out of all partes of the kingdome, raysinge the walles hygher, and fortifyinge the towers once builded by Semiramis, all whiche woulde little haue

helped the great Babilon against the power of Africano, if the puissant arme of the young Greke, had not defended it. But thus the Assirians were almost at their wittes ende, not knowing howe to repell him, for the bruite of his fame was greatly noysed. The Souldan of Babilon well experimented in warfare, commaunded all whiche could beare armour to come to Babilon that his forces béeing vnited, heée might bée of greater power agayst his enimies, Africano stayed not till hee came to the very walls of Babilon, where he gladly beheld the citie, biscause of the fame it had to be so great & so well peopled, he highly commended of the sumptuous edifices & high wals enclosing it, which enflamed his desire to the Lord of it. Presently he made to pitch his tends in a large field, enuironing the wals as farre as he might, for it as impossible to compasse them round about with two of Xerxes armies, he had in his camp .20000. knights, & .30000. horsemen, & two strong giants beside, the one of them called Herbyon, & the other Dardario through whose force hee thought to haue ouercome the Assirians. So soone as he had trenched round about his camp and prouided for the safegard of his army, before he would enterprise any farther, he sent a messenger with a letter to y^e Souldan, conteining this that followeth.[1]Africanos letter.I the great and mightie Africano king of Media and Persia, send gréeting vnto thée Souldan of Babilon, son of Orixerges. Know that the report of thy citie of Babilon. hath procured me to cut the seas, & to arriue in this countrey, rather with desire to haue it as mine owne, then for any pleasure to offend thy person or molest thy people, for thy father and mine during their liues wer great friends, which friendshippe I would willingly should endure betwéene vs, if y^u wilt as willingly satisfie my desire, albeit I am content in recompence thereoff, to giue thée y^e kingdome of Persia or Media, chuse thée whether. Nowe thou knowest my whole meaning, faile not to accōplish my de-

sire, for vnlesse I haue it with thy good wil, I wil force thée therevnto maugre thy ill will.Farewell.The messenger comming to the gates of y^e citie was let in, and being brought into the pallaice, he deliuered y^e letter to the Souldan in the presence of Prince Florion, and the other knights of y^e court. The letter was read, and they all said that in great pride the Pagan had so written, but bicause prince Florion & the most part of those which were there, knew the strength and power of Africano in y^e battailes forepassed, they would not make answere nor speak a word vntil they had heard y^e Souldans minde. Beeing in this order all hushed, the knight of the Sunne rose vp, and demaunded lisence of the Souldan to giue answere to the messenger. The Souldan graunted it him, then the knight of the Sunne aduauncing his voice that it might be heard spake to the messenger thus. "Retourne to thy Lord, for it is now to late to aunswere his letters, but in y^e morning my Lord shall call his counsel & shal send thy Lord an answere by one of his knights, to whō he must giue credit in this behalfe." Thus y^e messenger dispatched from y^e Souldan went to his Lord, who little delighted in the foreslowing of the Souldans answere, for the lesse waied the Souldans power. Therfore he determined in few daies to destroy y^e great citie, burning & wasting all, for al that, that he wished rather to haue bene owner of it by exchaunge or couenant then by rasing and battering the walles which were so goodly. The messenger auoiding the pallaice, y^e knight of the Sunne directed his speach to the Souldan in this wise. "Sith your excellencie wel vnderstandeth y^e arrogancie and high disdaine of Africano, & hath giuen me in commission to deuise y^e aunswere, I humbly beséech your grace to be content therewith if to morrow in y^e morning I alone take vpon me this message to satisfie him as shal séeme best vnto me, & according as his pride deserueth." When y^e knight had so said, y^e sute which he made greeued the Souldan very much, although y^e great exploites which he had already

done, and which were diuined to be done by him somwhat abated his griefe, yet gretly preferring y^e valour of Africano aboue y^t which he had heard of al y^e princes Pagans, for there might none be compared to him, he put of y^e knight of the Sunne for that time with this aunswere, y^t he would not haue him to hazard himselfe in such daunger, vntil he had growen to more ripe yeares. But if y^e Souldan was in any perplexity for loue to y^e knight, much more was prince Florion troubled which had had experience of Africanos puissance, & had séene Africano in his own person, demene himself so lustely in y^e battaile betwéene them, y^t he thought him to be vnparagonized for manhood, & therefore he was more then vnwilling y^e knight shold alone dele in this matter, albeit he had well & worthely acquited himselfe against Brandafileo & the strong Raiartes, for it was not a thing cōuenient in his iudgement, y^t he being as yet of tender years should proue his body vpon Africano. But were it that y^e Souldan & the prince Florion were loth of this, as at the first it appeared, yet they thought it best to dissemble their conceipts, least y^t knight should take displeasure at their little account of him, & therfore in the end, after some consultation had with Lirgandeo, w^t a milde countenaunce the Souldan agréed to y^e knightes request, saying. That he would put into his hands, both his honour & the cause, to the end y^t he should aunswere Africano as best should like him. The knight of y^e Sun would haue kissed y^e Souldans hand, but y^e Souldan imbraced him, & there it was solemply enacted that the next morrow, the knight of the Sunne should be y^e onely messenger. Clauergudo, & the prince Florion lay at him earnestly to beare thē in his company, but he shift them of with this, y^t it behoued him to be alone for the aunswere which he should giue to Africano.The knight of the Sunne, maketh answer to Africano as to his letter. Cap. 23AT the day péepe before the gray morning, the valiaut & worthy knight of y^e Sunne got him vp, and y^e means time while he ought to execute his charge, he armed him

selfe with that armour which the wise Lyrgandeo had bestowed on him, & so stayed a great while vntil it was past broad day, euery minute in this time seeming an houre, & euery houre .xl. for his magnanimus stomacke alwayes coueted to put himselfe in praise, where to exercise his valoure, and so when it was now time, casting a faire horne about his necke tipt with golde, and hauing a horse vnder him the best that the Souldan had, (as the night before he had taken his leaue of the Souldan and the other knights of the court), so he priuely put himselfe on his iourney, without béeing séene of any of the courte, and makinge those gates of the citie to bée opened which were shutte to Africanos campe, hée rode thorugh, and by softe paces comming within a bowe shot of Africanos owne tent, he winded his horne so loude, that it was easely hearde, in both the enimies campe, and the citie of Babilon. Immediately, the Souldan, the Prince Florion, Clauergudo, and other knightes cryed Alarme, and issued foorth of the gates in battaile araye to sée what the good knight of the Sunne woulde doe, and by and by the walles and highe towers were full fraught with as well nobles and communaltie. The king Africano in his tent busied about other matters, hearing the shrilnesse of the sound was somewhat disquiet not thincking any knight to haue had the hardinesse to sūmon him to the battaile, and desirous to know who he was, he called before him one of the two Gyants which came with him named Herbyon a strong man and king of the Camarians, a little region adioyning to Media, to him he sayd, "take thy horse and armour, and ride toward that knight which hath winded his horne, and faile not for any entreatie to bring him before vs, here in our presence to declare his message." The gyant hauing his charge, delayed no time, but hastely arming himselfe with fine stéele, he tooke a strong speare in his hand, and rode toward the knight of the Sunne, who in the mydst way abode his comming very glad, when he sawe so greated

a Gyaunt come against him, as desirous to purchase honour vpon his lykenesse. But the Guant sayd vnto hym. What art thou knight so bolde and venturous, that hast in such wise disturbed our campe, wyth the noyse of thy horne. The Knight of the Sunne replyed. I am a knight of y^e Souldans which come to the king Africano to make him answer to the letter by him sent vnto the Souldan. Now returne you backe and tell him, I am here to doe my message, and if he will heare it bidde him come armed and well horsed for otherwise I will not make him answere. The Gyant very scornfully tooke vp a great laughter, and giuing the knight a little sowce on the helmette with his gauntlet he sayd vnto him. "Now I tell thée, that that thou arte the maddest knight in the worlde to challenge him to battayle, at the only heariug of whose name the greatest part of al Asia doth tremble, and if thou wert not a simple foole thou wouldest not in such sort discouer thine impotencie. If thou hast any message to the kynge Africano from the Souldan come with me and thou shalt be brought to his presence, for he is not such a one as to come into the fielde agaynst one sely knight. The kynge Africano himselfe must hear my message sayd the Knight of the Sunne and he must heare it armed, for otherwise I will not open it." The strong Herbyon was angrye at the knights wordes and thincking him to be but as other knights were or amongst the meanest he offered to haue set the knight beside the saddle and so to haue drawne him perforce to y^e king, shewing herein to less pride & disdain then the gréedy Fawlcon doth in the pursute of the simple Pigeon to carry it to the ayre among the young ones. But his lotte was farre otherwise, for the knight perceuing his entent tourned the poynt of his spere and strake him so strongly on the chest, that though his armour was good it entred and lyttle and left him windlesse for a time. Herbyon thought himselfe now not well at ease, and therefore retourning to himselfe, he neuer studyed at 

the courtesie of the kinght in sparing him in his traunce, but taking one part of the field and broching his horse with the spurs, his speare being in the reste with deadly rage he ranne against the knight of the Sunne, who was nothing slow in the receipt. Their shocks were such in their méeting that the heauy speare of the strong Herbyon brake into shyuers in y^e fine helmet of the Knight of the Sun, not diseasing him. But the knight of the Sunne hit the Gyant with such dexteritie that he ouerthrew him and the great wayght of his body made the Gyant weare his necke on the to side lyke a fidler, which was no little payne vnto him. Yet he gate vpon his féete rising with much a doe. "Then the Knight of the Sunne finding him vprisen bad him defend himselfe. The Gyant aunswered that he could not, therefore doe with me what you will. The knight of the Sunne sayd. No, but retourne to the kinge Africano thy Lorde and tell him that a knight of the Souldans doth awayte him here to make aunswere vnto his letter, and if so be he be minded to heare it, will him in his armour to come foorth, for in no other order will I vtter it." The Gyant answered he would doe it, and not being able to sit on horsebacke, he was compelled to go on foote through the campe, driuing in his thought the remembraunce of the knights prowesse, so that hee was perswaded that not twentie knights Assyrians could haue done him so much harme as this one knighte had done. The Souldan with the Princes Florion and Clauergudo wer no lesse amazed in their cōtemplation to beholde the euent of the first welcome, and they gaue great thanckes to their gods for sending them so good a knight. Herbyon came before the king Africano his Lorde, and without fayling in any part declared to him that which had chaunced with the knight, and the message which was sent by him, moreouer telling the king that he thoughte that knight to be the strongest knight in the worlde, for that with these two blowes which he had giuen him, hee
 
had throwen him to the grounde, and might haue killed him.The king Africano not a lyttle sory to sée y^e strōg Herbyon so ill entreated and abashed at the force of one only knight, would therevpon haue put on his armour to haue bene auenged on the knight and to heare his message. But the other Gyaunt then in presence called Dardario, and much about Herbyons pitch, being of no lesse value then the first, in his choller menacing the knight, swore a great othe that he would bring the knight bound hand and foote vnto the king, wherfore taking a great horse be passed through the campe and aproching néere the Knight of the Sunne, he would not salute y^e knight, but as his anger was throughly kindled, with a great spere as big almost as a Pyne trée, he prepared himselfe for the carier. And the worthye Greeke knowing the Gyauntes errande dyd the lyke and spurring his horse he came vnto the close. The great speare of the Gyant was thought to haue perced the harnesse of the knight, by reason of the few shyuers that it made, but it did not so, and contrarywise the knights speare couched with great dexteritie entered through the body of the great Dardario a great parte of the staffe appearing at the shoulders.By this meanes the monstrous Gyant fell dead from his horse with such a grone as the tall Cedars of Libanus make, being rent vp by the roote. The Babilonians reioyced excedingly at this: but Africano was all enflamed wyth choller to sée his Gyaunt slayne wyth one onely blowe and knowing that to himselfe alone this base was bidde in great rage rose from the seate where hee sate, without speaking a word, & entring into his tent armed himselfe with sure armoure, and chose him a very strong speare, not tarying for squyre or page to helpe him.In this anger he was so terrible that none of his people durste come néere him, and so with a most fierce and cruell coūtenance he armed himselfe. So soone as y^e Pagan
had buckeled on his armour, immediately ther was brought him a horse such a one as could haue carried tenne armed knights, as I thinke the same bredth whereof the horse of Troy was. The trappings of the horse aswell golde as the stirops and all his armour set with precious stones, that he might wyll séeme a great Lord which was mayster of such armory, but this was the straungest sight that Africano set vpon so mighty a horse made him nowithstanding to bow & double vnder him. But to go forward Africano taking the greatest speare which might be had, rose with a fofte pace towards the Knight of the Sunne. The Knight of the Sunne saw him come from amongst his people and thought presently that he was the kynge Africano aswell for his rich armour, and his horse so curiously barbed, and the talnesse of his personage which he very well noted to be not farre dissonant from the common report: so he beséeched his gods from his heart to be fauourable vnto him agaynst so strong a Gyant. Africano well viewed the knight of the sunne his stature and making, and vpon these premisses inferred thus much, that well might he be a man of much force which so well shewed in his exteriour countenaunce, and much more in his deēdes and valour. But comming néerer vnto y^e knight as his custome was little to regarde the whole worlde, so with a proud & disdaynfull voyce, he spake vnto y^e knight. "Thou miserable & wretched knight, thou sayst thou art a messenger & bringest a message vnto me, thou hast slayne the Gyant Dardario and almost y^e strong Herbyon, which two had ben sufficient to haue bet downe y^e walles of Babilon, I swear vnto thée by my gods y^t if al y^e world were giuen me for thy rāsome thou shouldst not escape y^e death. The Knight of the Sunne embasing his voyce mildelye aunswered. If I haue had to doe with thy Gyants Africano, they were occasioners of it themselues, for I came not hether to other purpose but to make the aunswere in the behalfe of the Souldan, and if I came onely to séeke

thée thou oughtst to haue bene first which should haue presented himselfe to mée, and to haue heard what I would haue sayd, and to haue heard mee as a messenger, and not to attempt my death as a knowen enemy. Now that thou art come Africano, I tell thee why I am come, heare it if thou wilt. The gods which haue preserued me from thy Gyants haue reserued me to fight with thée. But listen on &c." Here the rage of the Pagan stopped the course of his talke, and the mightie Africano smiting his hande on his thighe for anger lifte vppe his other hande also to haue buffeted y^e knight, but a better minde ouertooke him that he thought it reason to heare the Souldans aunswere before he should condepmne the messenger, and so staying, he bad him tell on quickly, for I will well punish thy offence whatsomeuer aunswere the Souldan sendeth mee. The Knight of the Sunne wishing the battayle with all his heart said. "Then know thou Africano that thy letter being receiued and reade in the presence of my Lorde the Souldan, after consultacion had, my Lord sendeth thée this aunswer by me. Albeit before this time thou art notoriously defamed for a tyrant in y^t thou hast falsely & fraudulētly enchroched vp many kingdoms, yet he ueuer thought thou wouldest haue enterprysed the vsurpation of the most sacred Assyrian Empyre, an Empyre consecrated to the gods, and claymed by them as their right, and in their righte gouerned by my Lordes auncestours and Liefetenaunts to the gods and their Feefarmers, and therefore though preaduenture the open wrongs done vnto men, the gods doe often pardon and winke at, yet seldome leaue they vnreuenged the iniuries offered to themselues, and as it is to be thought so manifest a contempt of their deuine power shall not escape them. Besides for the citie of Babilon, he letteth thee to vnderstande that thy selfe art not ignoraunt that it is his and that he hath right to it as heire to the king Orixeres his father on that part of his liueloode, and that thou hast no title nor colourable shewe

to demaund it. Wherefore if it be so y^t thou wilt take it against all reason from him, hée telleth thée that he can no lesse doe then defend it from thée & the whole world, for hauing right and iustice on his side, hée little feareth the inuasion of man," deliuering his message in this forme of woords, the knight of the Sunne sayde. This is the Souldans aunswere, and pausing a while, he began againe thus. "And I, Africano craued of my Lord to be the messenger, for I would thou shouldst know how daūgerously thou offendest the diuine Gods in entering vpon y^e kingdome of Persia, and disenheriting the Prince Florion, the legitimate and onely Lord of that kingdome. Now therfore thou shouldest well doe, to surrender thy claime into his hands, and contente thée with the reuenues already receiued, & the iniust deteining of his right so long time. If thou wylt doe this not for my sake, but for the high gods agaynst whom thou hast hainously trespassed, thereby thou shalt pacifie the Gods and leese the name of a tyrant, so odious and so detested amongest men. If thou wylt styll perseuer in this thy tyrannicall obstinacy, I vtterly defie thée to y^e death, and certifie thée y^t either I wil slay a tyrant, or vpon a tyrant I will be slaine." Whilest the knight of y^e Sunne amplified at large vpon this point. Africano albeit very angry, yet marked him from top to toe, waying with what confidency he had discharged his charge, sometimes quietly admonishing to amend, & otherwise threatening & defying with a fierce semblaunce. But as he cared neither for God nor man, so he swallowed vp y^e knights woords, reputing the knight for a foole, for he thought his name only to able to afraye any knight, thus he replied. "Wer thy hands foolish knight as good to fight, as thy tongue is fine in preaching, I would not meruaile though thou hadst y^e hardines to defame Africano. But I wil curtail thy copie w^t this currish answer. Prepare thee to y^e battaile, & take this promise at my hand, y^t if I be ouercome, I wil leue to Florion not onely y^e king-

dome of Persia but also all that which I my selfe haue of possessions in Asia, & so saying Africano made against the knight, but the Knight of the Sunne wisely to order his affayres aunswered him saying. Stay a little Africano and heare that which I say. Thou knowest that already this day I haue twise fought with two of thy Gyants, and am foreweried, if now I fight with thée and thou subdue me, what honour shalt thou get thereby? will not men say that thou tokest me at the aduantage, when I was hurt before or weryed as I am? Appoynt that our combat be to morrow, and that assurance be had of this condicion on either parts, & say thou the same before the principall of thy army, that if perhaps I should slay thée in this battayle, y^e Souldan should not néede to haue a newe skirmish with thy people." This deuise of the knight was sore against Africanos minde, for he would willingly haue purged some parte of the choller which he brought with him boiling in his stomack: but seing this auoidance could not be at this time made with the warrantie of his honour, he graunted to the condicions, and thus aunswered him. Let it be so as thou sayst, foolish knight, I wil do thée a pleasure in delaying y^e time of reuenge of my knights and they foolish woords, but sith I may not refraine my anger hauing thée before me, retourne hastely to y^e citie and I will to my tent, & with this he tourned y^e raynes of his horse & came to his pauilion wher he fed vpon melancholy all the day, not speaking to any one. The Knight of y^e Sun deffered y^e battaile till y^e next day, not for y^t he was wery, but to aduertise y^e Souldan of y^t which was agreed vpon, now y^e rather to assure himselfe retourned to y^e citie, wher he was receiued w^t grat ioy & pleasure of all his friends, & being within y^e pallaice he told y^e Souldan to what issue he had brought y^e matter, he was very ioyfull by reson of y^e wise Lyrgādeos prophecies which he hoped thē to be accōplished, & partly doubtful of y^e succes, biscause prince Florion knew Africanos strēgth was such as few wer able to

resist it, he would haue had him not to deale in this aduenture alone, and requested him to ioyne vnto him some other companiōs, namely Prince Florion & Clauergudo, which themselues laboured greatly, but hee gaue them thanckes and excused himselfe with this that it was so decreed, but sayth he ther may be a time wherin you may employ your forces. For he knew the people of Africano to be so hardy that it perchaunce their Lorde shoulde be slayne or be in daunger, they would either succour theire Lord, or worke his reuenge vpon the conquerour. Therfore he willed them to bee in a readinesse. So these two knights gladly accepted that charge, and all that day chose out of the people, those which should the next day keepe the fielde with them to be at hande for succours to the knight if any treason should be compassed agaynst hym. The Knight of the Sunne tooke his reste merely till the day wherein he prospered as you shall now heare.¶ A cruell battayle betweene the Knight of the Sunne and Africano, with the discomfriture of Africanos hoaste. Cap. xxiiij.SO soone as the day appeared the noble Greeke arose from his bedde, and he being nowe ready to arme himselfe, the Souldan, the Prince Clauergudo, Florion and other knightes his friendes came into his chamber, which all helpped to arme him. When he was all armed, the wise Lyrgandeo came in also with a helmette in his handes, the richest and most precious that euer was seene and the strongest also & the best wrought that euer came on knights head, for that the wise man had made it by obseruation of signes and planetts in such aspects that no sworde how good soeuer, might enter into it, and he had bene more then twentie yeares in making it to haue the true coniuncion of the celestiall bodyes which were apte for the operation of it, besides all which, he had fetched

from farre countries, the stuffe whereof it was made, for it was no common mettall. This helmet was for workemanship so excéeding, as for it onely Lirgandeo wan hys spurres, and was commended aboue all the learnedst and wisest Magicians, for none other hauing not attained to the lyke perfection in Astronomy or Arte Magicke coulde haue euer made it. Nowe as I sayde comming into the chamber, where the knight of the Sunne, the Souldan, and the rest were, and shewing his helmet, hée droue them all into a wonder at the beautie and richesse of the helmet, for although they knewe not the hidden vertue of it, yet for the brauerie of the stones they iudged it valuable with a kings delight. He bare in it a féeld Azour of the liknesse of the element in most quiet and peaceable manner, not troubled with winde or cloudes, in the chiefe there was a Sunne guilded spreading his beames al ouer the helmet, as it were the mantling, somwhat besides good armory I thincke, but well fitting for so gorgious a péece of armour. The Sunne shined so bright, that it almoste dazeled the eyes of the beholders. This helmet christening him now by the name of the knight of the Sunne, as the Sunne in his left side named him, the gentleman of the Sunne when he was first founde in the Sea by Florion. The wise man came vnto the knight and tooke from him the helmet which he had already laced on, & put this other, saying, My Lorde you goe to fight with one so strong and valiant a knight, that neither may I report it for the straungenesse, neyther can you giue credit vnlesse you haue tryall, nowe though the helmette you haue is very good, yet béeing hacked and brused with the terrible blowes of stronge Raiartes, it is not suche a one as maye resist the weightie strokes of Africano, but this which now I giue you, make much of it, for I knowinge that this battayle ought to bée foughten by you in the right of my nephewe the Prince Florion, haue this xx. yeares and more busied my selfe aboute it, and ful-

ly finished it, not past a yeare since. The knight of the Sunne triumphed nowe to be made the master of so rare an helmet, and in so néedfull a time, saying to Lyrgandeo in thanckfull wise, that he accepted better of that helmet then of the whole worlde, if it were giuen hym. "You doe not amisse in so dooing, aunswered the wyse man, for I tell you the time will come when you shall make exchaunge of it vnto a knight straunger farre borne out of these countryes, and I doe not meruaile thoughe you shall then make merchaundise of the headpéece which nowe you so highly regarde, for at that time you shall sell the most precious thinge that euer you had, for a worse thing which shall bringe you to the ieopardy of death a M. times, and neither shall wit nor might, cunning nor courage helpe you to auoyde this chaunce." The knight of the Sunne stood looked vopon y^e wise man, as not witting to what ende those woordes tended, and studying a long time, he thus gainsayed it. "Of things to come, I haue naught to say, but to referre suche thinges to the prouidence of our Gods, but of thinges which are already come, thus much I saye, that I knowe nothinge in the world for which I woulde lose this helmette gyuen mée in so good oportunitie." But the morning béeing farre spent they left off for that time, and departed all from the pallaice towards the Souldans army, & setting their people in order, they passed out of y^e gates with all things prepared for to kéepe the field. The knyght of the Sunne accompanied with the Souldan, and the other two Princes Florion, & Clauergudo, Armineo & the wise Lyrgandeo rode to the place appointed for the execution of y^e conditions concluded vpon. The great Africano was in place before expecting his aduersary, whom when y^e knight espied, he rode against with onely two knightes, of the most principall in the Souldans hoast. The knight of the Sunne saluted Africano courteously, but Africanobéeing of a stubburne and discourteous nature, gaue hym

the resalutation in this manner. Thou oughtest to haue come earlyer into the feelde, to the ende our battayle might haue bene sooner dispatched, but tell me nowe quickly the articles of the agréement to bée made, and spende no more time least we take an other daye of respite. Naye there is no more to doe, aunswered the knight of the Sunne, but that of thy parte, two of thy knightes bée iudges, and for my part these two knightes, Clauergudo Prince of Fraunce, and his vnckle héere present shall sit with them, before them take an othe for the performaunce of that whereoff thou madest mee promise béeing alone with thee. I am well contented with this sayd Africano, and now I sweare the same, that if I bée either slayne, or yelden the kingdome of Persia shall be redeliuered to Florion, & this I commaund my knights to sée auouched. So soone as hee had sayde this hée gaue backe, and the knight of the Sunne did the like, the iudges, assigning a place for the combatte, Nowe are the two couragiousest knightes of the worlde lefts the one agaynst the other with so fierce and manly countenaunces that it might haue dismayed the spectators. When the sounde of the trumpette had sommoned them to the battayle, the two stronge knyghtes gyrdinge theyr horses with their spurres, rode the one agaynst the other, with such vyolence as if the cloudes had rente a sunder by the outbrasting of the thunderbolte. Their great speares broken vpon their armour flew in small shyuers, and they rode one by the other as quietly as if no shocke had bene made. Africano the Pagan not acquainted with such encountries, and alwaies wont to vnhorse all knyghts whome hée mette seeing the knight prepared for y^e second iourney meruailed much who this strong warriour might be, whom before this time he had not proued, nor yet euer heard off. But lightly casting these thinges in his minde, as at a sodeine he drew out his sword & tourned towardes his enemy which was then ready for him.

They strake each other such heauie blowes that warding them on their sheeldes, although they were of pure steele, yet they cleaued them in the middest, and their swoordes lighted on their helmettes driuing out great sparcles of fire before them. The great Africano gaue the knight of the Sunne vppon his helmette such buffettes and with such force that euery man would haue iudged it had ryuen the headpeece. There is the cunninge of the wyse Lyrgandeo wel appeared, for it was not possible for yron, steele, or Adamant stone, but to haue yelded to that stroke. But what thincke you: y^t the knyght of the Sunne did, when he thought that he had cleane lost his hearing by it, and sayde to himselfe, that not without good cause Africano was greatly feared amonge the Pagans? Nay, to the no lesse meruaile of both hoastes, the knight of the Sunne let driue at Africano with such force as it was to the no small admiration of all men that he hewed him not in péeces. But you must learne that when Africano passed by sea from Afrike into Asia, it was his chaunce to saile by Lemnos where Vulcans forge was. There he heard of Vulcans caue where his storehouse was, and enteringe into it he achieued straunge thinges, not here to be recounted, and gayned Vulcans armour wrought with his owne handes, the best in all the land. This when Africano tryed often times to be very good, whereoff he was well pleased, from that time foorth he neuer fought with other but with that. Nowe albeit this headpéece was well framed from béeing cut, yet the knight of the Sunnes blowes were so heauy y^t oftentimes Africano wist not where he was, & recouering would say vnto himselfe. What is this? I beléeue the strength of the whole world conspireth with this knight against me, & if it be not so that he is of the offprigs of our Gods, yet am I sure y^t he is no man. But among all the great blowes which y^e knight of the Sunne lent to Africano there was one at the fore end of the battayle vppon y^e top of Afri-canos helmette, the swoorde not enteringe but slidinge downe vpon his shoulders with suche force that it made him leane all his body vpon the horseneck, whereoff if he had not taken hold he had fallen to the ground. Then the Pagan sure enough yet in his saddell and his force redoubling as his anger encreased smote at the inchaunted helmet that he made the knight confesse in his thought, that his helmet was his good borrow. The blow sounded throughout all the féelde, as if it had bene a bell, and the knight of the Sunne with the weight of the blowe, neither boult vpright nor full declining, but staying vpon the arson drouped as halfe dead. But the bloud gushing out of his nose fetched him againe quickely ere that Africano could come within him. Nowe séeing it time to defend himselfe from his aduersary, he stoode vpright in his stirops, and with both his handes strake at Africano, so y^t if the workman had not bene more to blame, the blowes had made peace betwéene them, but for all the workmans craft, the weight of the blowe brased the helmet whiche was the cause of Africanos spéedier death. Africano benummed of his sences, the bloude strayning though the ioyntes of the helmet and he sitting in his saddle as halfe dead. The horse sore daunted with the blowe, stoode styll till Africano reuiued, and in the gathering of his strength outbrayed thus much in his thought. O infernall furies are you not all hyred against mée? or is it creadible that either Iupiter, or Saturne, or Mars, or all the Gods maye haue the like force as this young mans. But Africanos heart fayled him not, albeit his woordes outraged, for he followed the knyght of the Sunne who attended hym speadely. Then the Prince Florion sayde to the Souldan his vnckle, "wee make great account of the trauayles of the auncient Assirians our forefathers, and of the Grecians with whome our countreymen ioyned at the expedition of Troy, but I cannot thincke that euer two so strong warriours haue ben as Africano and Raiartes.

You may boldly iustifie that, aunswered Lyrgandeo, for there was neuer vntil this day a battaile betwene two knights so valiaunt and sharp as this is, nor yet euer two so hardy drew swoords against eche other, although things before done carry a greater burden of authoritie then that which we our selues can testifie." But the ielousie which Clauergudo had ouer the knight of the Sunne was not a little, to be iudge of so valiant behauiour, not that he had an ill eye towardes his friendes good Fortune, but either wishing to himselfe the like tryall, or desiring to aduenture with his friend, although not many dayes ended ere he had his fill to his contentment. Africanos people looked euer for the victory, greatly forethincking them that any one knight should make resistaunce to their Lord, as hauing experience in themselues, which al shooke for feare to sée him angred. Now was it more then two houres since y^e battaile began, and then fortune alwayes fickle & vnstable which had of a long time gone euen with Africano, now played hir part in hir kinde, and as already wery of hys companie tourned hir tale, and stroke in an other waye, desirous to shewe the great swiftnesse of his euertourning whéele, and minding y^e sodeine ouerthrow of those which to much trust in hir. For Africano desperately determining to breake vp the fight one way or the other: once againe hit the knight of the Sunne vppon his Magicall helmet that he tooke quyte his memory from the knight, the swoorde and the raines falling from him. Yet the swoorde hauging by a longe stringe at the pomell was not out of his reach, but the horse hauing the libertie of the raines, and féeling his part of the blowe flange vp and downe the féelde with his master, the stronge Pagan folwinge to haue vnhorsed him. But howe déere was this blowe to Africano for it coste him no lesse then hys lyfe, for the valiant knight of the Sunne neuer stayned in fight, became woode madde for hys hurte, and in great rage tooke his sworde in both hys handes, and repayed

the borrowed blowe so surely vpon Africanos heade that not Vulcans well tempered steele coulde forbid the passage, but that it quartered the helmette and made the braines sprinckle on the grounde. Nowe sounde yée trumpets, for in this wise is the great Africano brought to grounde, ending his life in such sorte as is fatall to tyrantes, whose death commonly is cruell and bloudy. This the Souldan and those of his part séeing, made such ioye as cannot bée tolde, but on the contrary side Africanos people made great lamentation, and reckening little vppon that which their Lord in his lyfe time had commaunded, bicause they were more in number then theyr aduersaries, they ioyned together in heapes sine discretione, and without a guide made an assalte vppon the knight and his adherentes. But they not taken at unawares receiued them accordingly. These were the Souldam, the Prince Florion, the Prince Clauergudo, and Armineo with the knight of the Sunne, in whose company they were the bolder, and comming to the foreward in the formost rancke, they finde of the stowtest and principallest knights that Africano had. These foure encountred them and vnhorsed as many as they came against, & breaking through the thickest thronge, they wrought wonders, especially the Prince of Fraunce desirous to get honour in the first heade of his knighthoode shoued into the middest, beheading some, and mayminge other some, making as it were a lane before him to passe throughe, so that the wise Lyrgandeo sayd openly that now his outwarde sight dyd well witnesse the selfe same thing which his Arte had shewed him in casting y^e constellation of this Knyght, for hée was a valiant knight, and the slaughter he made was nygh hand comperable with that of the knight of y^e Sunne. Vppon y^e left winge prince Florion tryed his manhood hauing néere vnto him the Souldan. Where (be it that otherwise to a stronge Gyant as Africano was he was inferior,) yet amonge the other people hée was

as proude as a rauenous wolfe amonge a flocke of shéepe. The Souldan and the good knight Armineo did their part, but what would all this auailed, vnlesse the knight of the Sunne had bet the waye before them with his sharpe swoord slaying so many as it was easy for the followers to kéepe the troden path. And now at this time y^e Souldans army appointed for the gard of the knight of the Sunne came to the battaile, and finding Fortune so courteous at their comming, they refused not hir gentlenesse, but following hir commaund, made it bloudy conflict for the aduersary. But yet a man may rightly say, that y^e knight of the Sunne deliuered that daye the Babilonians from death or bondage, for if he had not ouercome Africano, not the high walles of the Quéene Semiramis could haue kept Africano out from enioying the Citie. But their Lord béeing slayne and they left without an head, theyr courage was so quailed that ere two houres passed, the greater part of thē was slaine likewise, & of those which remained on liue, the most part fledde by one and one, the Assirians pursuing them till the Souldan commaunded the retreate to be blowen, fearing to be ouertaken by the night, by this meanes some escaped to their countrey, most of them béeing inhabitantes of Media, where also was the abode of Africanos son called Brandimardo, not being able for yeares to be made knight, and therefore goinge not out with his father to y^e warre. These so soone as they came home crowned Brandimardo and incensed him to the reuenge of his fathers death, for although he was of yeares younge and tender, yet was he very stronge and of a lusty body, béeing lyke vnto his father as well in stature as in qualities, and in déede béeing continually layde at by his fathers subiects, passing into Greece, he behaued himselfe manifully as shall bee shewed you. Well the Souldan and those which were with him as you haue heard, retourned in ioy and pleasure, and highly magnifying the noble knight of y^e Sunne, so as this discourse as an

argument of greate good will canuased betwéene these knights and Princes brought them ere they were wel aware before the pallayce gate, where the Princesse Balisea welcomed them with torch light, the first whome shée embraced was the Knight of the Sunne to whome shee sayd on this wise. "Syr knight we haue great cause to giue thancks to our gods for your hether ariual. First you deliured my Lorde the Souldan and me from death, & now you haue set all vs frée from sorrowfull captiuitie." But madame aunswered the knight of the sunne, to my Lord the Prince Florion and to these other knights you ought to attribute this, for they are those which haue destroyed Africanos hoast. Then the Princesse tourned to Clauergudo and thancked him lykewise for his paynes in the defence of hir fathers citie, and so to the rest in that order which best lyked hir. After this they supped in the great hall, continuing there their sports till bedtime, as lykewise the citizens wel shewed their good lyking of the victory by bonfires and other reuelling sport. The nexte day they ordeined that which followeth.¶ The Knight of the Sunne, the two Princes Florion and Clauergudo, with a great hoast enter into Persia and there put Florion in possession of the crowne. Cap. xxv.THe next day after dinner, the Souldan himselfe entred into the counsayle chamber, and other affayres being layd a part, y^e wise Lyrgandeo made this oration. "It is apparently knowne vnto vs all how bountifully our high gods haue dealt with vs as wel touching my Lord the Souldan as the Prince Florion, and the whole nation of the Assyrians in bringing to this court, the knight of the Sunne and the Prince Clauergudo: who by their notable vertues not onely haue kept this citie from sacking, but also as we make account,

haue left the realme of Persia naked for resistaunce, not one speare remayning to be tossed agaynst vs. For the attayning of either of these thinges we are not ignoraunt, how weake and vnable we were, that were it not for those two young gentlemen, not onely our homebredde power but also thrice as manye of forreyne succoures coulde not haue hindered Africano from his puropse. Wherefore I thincke it conuenient, that sithe the Gods haue graunted vs this victory, and that we haue the winde at our backes that we followe our good Fortune while we haue hir, least by ouerslipping the opportunitie, we to late repēt our to much daintines. My meaning is y^t with such speed as may be, y^e Prince Florion & these Lords depart the realme into Persia, there to make claime of his right by armes, whilst euery man is occupied in complayning on his owne harmes. For although as yet there dare no man stande against vs, yet for a certeintie there is a king of MediaAfricanos sonne, which ere it be longe wilbe our heauy neighbour, he is not yet made knight, but his desteny foresheweth vs that if he once come to boord in Persia we shalbe no lesse disquyeted w^t his company, then we were with Africano his father." The wise Lyrgandeo made an ende of his oration, knitting vp hys matter with this clause (that it wais not out of the way to aduise themselues) notwithstanding for good reasons this was his iudgement.They which would neuer contrary him in any poynt tooke no further respite, but consenting to the effecte of Lyrgrandeos oration concerning the conqueste of Persia tooke this order. That Prince Florion, the knight of the Sunne, Clauergudo and Armineo his vnckle, with fifteene thousande knightes, and fiftie thousande footemen, within tenne dayes should prepare themselues for this aduenture, the Princesse Balisea abiding with the Souldan hir father, till the kingdome were well setled from tumulte, and the prince in peaceable frtion of y^e crown.

This they dealt in effectually, for within the compasse of the dayes limitted they lefte Babilon, the Souldan and the Princesse onely comforted with the hope which Lyrgandeos made promise off.The fiftéene thousande knightes with the footemen by long iourneyes entring into Persia, and comming néere vnto one of the chiefest cities of the kingdome, there in the plaine vnloded their carriage to erect their tents there. But the citizens hauing vnderstanding of Africanos death by the fugitues in the last discomfiture of Africanos hoast, and thinking it not safetie for themselues to rebell agaynst their liege and naturall Lorde Florion especially he hauing the aide of y^e whole floure of Babilō, set their gates wide open for hys armye, & sent of theyr worthyest knights to Florions tent to inuite him to his owne citie, and to craue pardon for their former reuoulting, in that time when they were lefte destitute of mans succour, not being able of themselues to withstand the force of Africano. And also excusing themselues that they had neuer a guide to conducte them into the fielde, agaynste so strong an enemye, hauing in his power the greatest part of all Asia.The Prince lightly excusing their fault easely condiscended vnto their requestes, and being gladde of so good enterteinement at the firste, the next daye rode into the citie, with the ioyfull acclamations of the whole multitude. There he resumed the crowne and scepter, and being in quyet seuzure, the subiects of the realme by the fame of his thether arryuall, came from all parts to do hym homage, so that in halfe a yeares space all the principall Cityes of the kyngdome submitted themselues, and there was lefte no more memorye of the vsuspers name.The kinge Florion seyzed of hys lande in such a fryendly manner, nowe tooke counsayle how to haue the Queene his wyfe conuayed thether, and for that it was

requisite that the king himselfe should tarry behinde for the appeasing of all tumults if any should arise in so raw a possession, he gaue the charge of fetching the Queene with all reasonable pompe, vnto the Knight of the Sun and the Prince Clauergudo they to take with them 200 knights for their safetie. They tooke it gladly, and fray their shippes with necessary prouision and other furniture for war, determining to trauayle by sea the sooner to come vnto their iourneyes ende. When euery thing was in a readinesse the knights tooke their leaue of y^e king Florion and the wise Lyrgandeo. But the wiseman not refrayning from teares, and louingly embracing the knight of the Sunne, burst out into these speaches in such sorte as the Sibilles in auncient time were wont to read mens destenyes. "Noble and worthy knight, you are determined to see Babilon, but you are vncerteyne whether euer to see it, or to retourne to Persia, and as little know I what shall befall. For truth it is, that all the heauenly sphéeres warrāt more vnto you then to any knight, what that is, it is kept from me, I cannot finde the entry therevnto wherefore I am in doubte of your hether retourne. But if the fates, or otherwise the course of the starres which impose a necessitie to man, carrie you beyond the compasse of your will into a farre country wher ther shall be greater neede of your presence, grudge not at it, but giue thancks to our gods. For all shal redound to your honour and the mangifiyng of your lignage. This I tell for a suretie that you shal neuer doe the thing in your life whereof you shall take lyke pleasure as in your two first audentures vndertaken for two knightes straungers, whome notwithstanding you shall not know till time and place discloseth them vnto you. Of your lyguage I wyll report nothing for it is ordayned by the gods that by the mouth of one of these two knights of whome I haue spoken your whole parentage should be layde open, before which time you shalbe at morll defiaunce. For the shut-

ting vp on this speach, the remainder onely is that I make offer of my seruice vnto you, whereof I hope it shall bée néedeles to make a profession in words, seing I am thervnto bounden by your manifolde friendships towards my kindred. In a worde Lyrgrandeo shall neuer fayle you in the thing, wherein either his wealth or wisedome maye stande you in stéede, and the day shall come wherein you being in the countrey wher you were borne, and amongst your owne parents, shall account them all for enemyes and yet no man shall take your part but only Lyrgrandeo, which for that time shall saue your lyfe, and I hope that this seruice shall not be the last in account, or the least in value which I wyll doe vnto you. The wise man ended, and they all which were present wondered to heare hym so diuine of things to come." But the Knight of the Sun not venderstanding the tenour of this prophecye, wisely referred all things to Gods prouidence, thanking the wise man for his great care ouer him.Nowe when on all partes all countesies were perfourmed and that the king Florion had commended them to his gods, they embarked themselues, and spredding their sayles followed the waye towardes Babilon as the chapter following shall declare.The Knight of the Sunne and the Prince Clauergudo being in their way towards Babilon, were deuided by a sodayne aduenture. Cap. xxvjAS already the noble and knightlye déedes of the Knight of the Sunne did bud out and were likely to florish more hereafter, so now not onely the celestiall influences, but the confluences of the tempestuous windes also, and the Sea it selfe became so carefull for his aduauncement that ther sayled nothing of that which mighte worke his preferment, for so it is that whē any thing is forced by the starres as to succéed

prosperously vnto a man, albeit mountayns of aduersitie impugne & assaile him, yet can they neuer expugne his good Fortune, but in the ende he recouereth his quyet reste inaugre the malice of misaduenture. And so the issue declared in the knight of the Sunne. For the ix. daye after that the knight of y^e Sunne, Clauergudo, and those which wer w^t them had sailed in y^e Persickesea, y^e night attached them ouercast with darke clouds without any starres appearing whereby the marriners construed the roughnesse of y^e wether on y^e morrow, & therfore guided towards land to cast anchor in some good herberowe till y^e stormes ceased. Eare the dawning of the day they discouered a docke not farre from the continent in their séeming very commodious, but in deede very daungerous as it proued. Entring the docke, they scarce had leasure to throw out their anchors but two other shipps ioyned with them to séeke some safe roade out of the tempest. These which last got to the port were very desirous to knowe what the ether might be, and therefore an armed knight so huge and great as if he had bene a Gyant mounting on the shippe boord called aloude vnto them to aunswere him. Some of the other shippe hearing him in this wise crying, leapte vpon the hatches saying. What is it sir knight that you would haue? "Mary I would know aunswered the knight what you are and whether you will." One of the company being stoute and of ill behauiour, and supposing thys knight to be some Gyant of that countrey minding to set vpon them, made him aunswere thus. "Retourne to thy dwelling, and bee not carefull to knowe them which knowe not thée, otherwyse assure thy selfe heere are knightes which will chase thée hence in such sorte as it shal wel grieue thée." The strange knight stomacking this rudenesse, sayde agayue. "Assuredly knighte thou arte some vilayne borne or of base byrthe, sithe in such order thou rewardest me demaunding onely vpon courtesie, but seing I cannot learne it of the with thy good will, I will"

compell thée therevnto with thine ill will, and saying no more be droue at the knight so strongly that he claue both shielde, helmette, and head vnto the eyes. O what a mischéefe doth ill speach breed vnto man, & how inexcusable was it in this knighte when he redemed this franke speach with his owne lyfe, and solde to make payment the lyfe of many others. An other knight seing his fellowe slayne, stept into his roome, and smote at the straunger, where by the clattering of theyr harnesse, the dinne was so great that it raysed the people on both partes by clusters. And there was a great fray betwixt them, the knight of the Sunne nor Clauergudo witting of it, till the great knight had ouerthrowen and put to death fiue or sixe of those knightes which came néerest to hande.The Knighte of the Sunne seing his knighets so destroyed, especially by this greate knighte leauing the others bent his force agaynst him, and strake him a blowe ouerthwart the headpeece making him to abate his courage. The great knight aunswered the loane, and the battayle was verye hotte betwéene them, for thoughe the night was darke yet they knewe where to hitte aswell by the flames which spring out of their helmettes as the clashing of their armour. Clauergudo put himselfe amongst the thickest and at his first godmorrow slew tenne knigths and then not finding with whome to fights, hee lepte into his enemyes shippe with his vncle Armineo where he felled more then xxx. knightes, and the skirmish beganne a fresh either part willing to helpe theirs, and the foure shippes grapled together, so that the fighte would haue ben dangerous if it had lasted lōger, but halfe an houre & a little more ouerpassed, y^e tempest which before threatened to appeare now outraged, & the port not verye sure, the iiii. ships were deuided by the storme euery one withdrawing himselfe to séeke succour. Now in the ship wherein the knight of the Sunne and the great knighte foughte there were no more knyghtes but they two,

for all followed Clauergudo into the other shippes. The two knights left alone were so earnest that they tooke little keepe either of the tempest or of their daunger. The succes of y^e battayle was doutefull, sometimes enclining to y^e one part sometimes to y^e other, neither part quailing, but gathering their strengthes to them by the emulation of each other. For y^e knight of the Sunne verely beleued that excepte his enemye had bene some such as Africano was he could neuer haue abid those mortall strokes: and the other knighte thought aswell that no manes force could be macheable with the knights, and either of them both had better cause to thanke Lyrgandeos kindenesse, especily this strange knight at this time, for had not his armour kept out y^e edge of y^e other knights armant sword he could not haue prolongued y^e battayle till day lyght, yet at y^t time he was so ouermatched y^t if a sodayn aduēture had not broke vp their fight, he had ended his lyfe in that place.But when it was broad day by this the battayle surceased, that the straunge knighte knewe the deuise of the Sunne vpon the knight of the Sunnes helmette, which when he espyed letting his sworde fall, and lifting vppe his beuere, he cast himselfe at the knights féete with this speach. "Oh my Lord the Knight of the Sunne pardon I pray your friende who my meere ignoraunce, hath made vpon your person, and who acknowledgeth in your suche souereigne vertue as may not be in other but in those to whome our gods haue imparted of their goodnesse. For if the day had lyngred, or that the morning had not bene somewhat cleare I should haue receiued a full paymente for my rashnesse: and saying this, he would haue embraced Del Febos knees. Now the kngiht of the Sunne so soone as y^e others visour was pulled vp knew well that he was the Prince Brandizel whom his father not willing to make knighte before his yeares were more, had lefte with the Souldan in Babilon. For he was scarcely eigh-

tene yeares of age, yet béeing in armour he was as byg as you haue heard off, and taking courage vpon his stature, in his Fathers absence hee laye at the Souldan his graundfather to be dubbed knight, thincking it longe till he were with his father, and his great friendes the knight of the Sunne, and the Prince Clauergudo. So after y^t he had obteined his sute of his graundfather he demaunded licence of departure of the Souldan and the princesse Balisea his mother to passe into Persia, which was graunted him, and two shippes charged with ij.C. knights to conuaye him thether, where after the fourth dayes sayling that chaunsed to him, which the historie hath recounted. But to retourne, as soone as the knight of the Sunne knewe his déere friende the Prince Brandizel very glad to haue found him so valiant and hardy he embraced him hartely, and so they communed of their owne affaires, and the desire that each had to see others. But as they began their seuerall stories by enterchaunge of speach, first one and then an other: The Marriners cryed that the shippe rent in péeces. So some lepte into the water, and other threwe out planckes to saue themselues by, and the knight of the Sunne finding the cockeboate néere vnto him, let it downe into the water by a cable, & calling the prince Brandizel, he lept into it first himselfe. Thus muche is ordinary in the course of worldly things, but that which is to come is beyond the credit of a storie as it were an extraordinary myracle. For when the knight of the Sunne lept into the boate, the cable rent in péeces, and with the force of the iumpe, and the rage ofthe windes together, the boate launched into the depth, that the Prince Brandizel coulde not followe hym, but gotte into a little boate whiche the gouernour of the shippe had before taken. But by and by after these Princes had thus escaped, the shyppe wherin they had bene, tore in péeces wyth the storme. Some béeing drowned, and other some in no little daunger, as

the waues began to swell, so euer prognosticatinge of their owne deathes. The knight of the Sunne saylinge alone in the vessell, and in such feare of destruction was not so stoute harted as to contemne the sencelesse element, but confessinge the imbecilitie of mannes power subiected vnder these weake thinges as fyre and water, besides causalties infinite more, hée commended hymselfe vnto hys Gods by earneste prayer, not yet onely for hymselfe, but also for his friende Brandizel, not beeing able to diuine of his deliueraunce. Sittinge thus in the baote all pensiue, till the wyndes were somewhat alayed, and the Sea waxed more calme, afterwardes hée looked about hym and sawe that hée was out of daunger, with other two thinges whiche made hym more to meruayle. The one was the great foyzon and plentie of all victualles, sufficient to a man for many dayes, the other was the swyftnesse of the boate in the Sea, hauinge neyther sayle nor oare to rule it, and musinge of this in his thought, hee coniectured presently that it should be done by Lyrgandeo, and therefore as very glad of suche a mans friendshippe in so needeful a time, hee gaue hym thanckes as hartely as if he had seene hym there. In thys order hee was vppon the Sea many dayes wythout knowing whether the wynde woulde dryue hym, tyll that from out of y^e Persians Seas he came into the Occean, and so coastinge the whole countrey of Asia, lying vppon that sea, he was carried into Africke, which stretcheth vppon the wyde West Seas. In which countrey the historye leaueth hym tyll an other wynde serueth, nowe it proceedeth with the storye of hys friendes, Brandizel and Clauergudo, who were on the Seas tossed in lyke manner. Clauergudo as the storye tolde you boorded his enimies with fiftie knyghtes in his companye and made greate hauocke of them, so that he had not left any of them alive if the storme had not risen so greatly. For the windes were so outragious betweene

them, and when they coulde stande no longer on shypboorde to trye it out, they lefte not off, to aske who each other was, the one party sayde we are Babilonians, and the other, we are Persians, all this happened in good time, for when they knew each other, they fel not againe to quareling, but they agreed to emptie their ships, thereby to auoide the daunger. So Clauergudo hauing new leasure to looke about him, the battaile béeing ended, and not finding the knight of the Sunne, nor the Prince Brandizel, withall remembring howe he had left them twaine in fighting, was greatly afraide least that the knight of the Sunne should endaunger the prince, before the one should know the other. Therefore he beseeched God like a good christian to deliuer thē both, & to make them know each other, thereby to make greater account the one of y^e other, & it is to be thought that this his prayer was heard, for the second day following the storme slacked,   the ship wherin they sayled arriued to a porte, not farre from a place where they were newly rigged. There they had not staied an houre, but that they sawe the boate in which the Prince Brandizel was. The mariners in Brandizels boat not béeing perfect in the hauen, woulde not venture to take landing there, but coasting a longe they passed by y^e shyps to finde some more safe place to land in. The prince was ascried by his mē in his ships, & therfore they made signes vnto y^e gouernour to stere towards thē, so y^e gouerneur vnderstanding y^e tokens, guided thether. The prince Clauergudo & his vnckle Armineo, standing on the hatches redy to welcome the Prince Brandizel, betweene whom there were shewed tokens of great good wil, & each made much of other as two faithful friends. But questioning about y^e knight of y^e Sunne. The Prince Brandizel declared the manner of their parting, & the daunger wherin he had left him. This caused great sorrow in thē, for they loued him as derely as any father his childrē or any wife hir husbā. And to assawge their griefe, Armineo remēbred vnto them

the wordes which the wise Lyrgandeo had spoken to the knyght of the Sunne at his departure. Whereby they were perswaded that his departure by such a chaunce was but for the achiuement of things more worthy of him alone, and for whom onely they were reserued. Now hauing stayed in this hauen two dayes to repayre their shippes, when they were in a readinesse they sayled towardes Babilon where they were goodly receyued of the Souldan and the Queene, both very ioyfull of the newes as touching Persia, and the king Florions peaceable possession, and agayne as sorrowfull for the losse of the knight of the Sunne, and the perill of death wherein Brandizel sawe him last. But in short time after there were letters receiued from Lirgandeo, conteining the certeintie of hys safetie, the manner of his escape, & the affaires wherein he was employed. Which last point bred a great desire in Clauergudo, & Brandizel to stray through the world, and to exercise the feats of armes. And a while after they had rested themselues in Babilon, they brought the Quéene to Persia by land, for they woulde nor more aduenture the Seas, especially hauinge the Quéene as parte of their burthen, and the historie bryngeth them on their waye as farre as Persia, whence it retourneth towarders Hungary to matters of lyke importaunce, wherein the younger sonne of Trebatio had to deale, whose prowesse is no lesss worthy my paynes, then hys brothers valoure is worthy of your remembraunce, for hée surpassed all other knyghtes in loyaltie and might, béeing equall to Donzel del Febo in all pointes, as héereafter you shall héere.¶ The Princesse Briana discouered to Rosicleer secretly that he was hir sonne. Cap. 27.THE story left the Princesse Briana straungely afflicted & tormented with the double losse, both of Prince
Edward hir husband, & Donzel del Febo hir sonne, which griefe no doubt had quickly killed hir, had not a Nymph giuen hir comfort at y^e well in the orchard as it hath bene shewed. But yet it somewhat eased hir melancholy that she had the fayre and courteous Rosicleer, in whose onely company she was wont to beguile hir mishappes, and by his meanes to forget hir miseries. For he was so gracious, as that he was beloued not onely of his mother, but of the other gentlewomen also which might not one minute spare his company, as if he had bene childe to euery one. This Rosicleer when he atteined to the age of .xij. yeares, remoued out of the monastery to a house hard by, where his nourse Leonardo kept, whom he thought to be his father. Héere he was diligently enstructed in all good literature, and in the exercise of armes, both to be able to be a good counsailer in peace, and as good a warriour in battayle, ouer and besides the knoweldge of the tongues, wherein Leonardo was very curious as hauing trauayled for his knowledge through the most parts of Europe and Asia, being thervnto both wise and wel learned. Rosicleer was of such pregnant wit, and so ripe of capacitie that he little néeded the helpe of a teacher, and to y^e which his nourse read, he added by his owne industry somwhat, that he became so profoūd in these studies, as if he had ben studyed in them all his life time at Athens. But remayning thus, vnder the gouernaunce of his supposed father till he was xiiij. yeares of age, he then was so highe and big made that fewe in that countrey were so tall, and béeing at this age, he was able for strength to doe that whiche thrée knyghtes together were vnable to doe. The Princesse knowing of his strength forbad hym hir fathers court, and would not suffer him to forgoe the monastery, for she feared least y^e king hearing of his towardnesse should enquire after him, & so reteine him in his seruice. For this cause Rosicleer thus kept in at this age, and thus strong became very sad, for his so straight enclosure

as if he had professed already a vowe in some cloyster, and his minde euer ranne vpon his desire to be made knight, to the ende he myght experiment the aduentures of the worlde, & learne by proofe that which he had often heard by rehearsall. Héerevnto hauing no hope nor helpe by this restraint it abated his chéere & encreased his sadnesse. Leonardo his nourse marking in what plight he was oftē demaunded the occasion of his heauinesse, but could by no meanes wringe it out of him, and so one daye talking with the Princesse, hée tolde hir that vnlesse she founde a remedy for hir sonne, his thought would anoy him. The princesse very pensiue at that which Leonardo had told, commaunded Rosicleer to be brought before hir presence. Rosicleer comming into the presence of the Princesse, knéeled downe, and humbly asked what was hir graces pleasure. The Princesse bidding him stande vp, spake thus. "Rosicleer, thy father Leonardo telleth mée thou art neuer mery, nowe therefore open to me the cause of this thy heauinesse, and if thou wantest ought whiche thy father can not supply, vtter it fréely, and I will prouide thée of the remedy to haue thée contented." Rosicleer hearing the woordes of the Princesse, knéeling downe againe, and sayde. "Madame I kisse you hande for the souereigne grace you shewe mée in hauinge suche compassion on my griefe, and I am well assured that if it were for any thing wheroff I haue néede, your Ladyship would furnish me of it, as hitherto you haue done, but if I bée sadde or solitary for any thing which grieueth me, it is not for neede of any necessarye prouision, for I thancke your goodnesse, I haue had it hetherto aboundantly considered by your highnesse without my speakinge. But it is for that in respect of my age, the lyfe whiche I now leade, is more lyke a gentlewoman then a young man, which made me desire to be dubbed knight, & to wander abroad for to seke aduētures. Now for y^t Iknow your Ladyships pelasure to be y^e contrary, as neither willing to 

depart without your lisence, nor daring to utter my desire vnto you, I cannot doe lesse but be sorrowfull, for I want the remedy of satisfying." When Rosicleer had thus sayd, the princese féeling already in him y^e heroicall stomack of his father Prince Edward (as she thought) and calling to minde the continuall casualties of knights arrant, burst into teares in great aboundaunce, which occasioned great ruth in the young Rosicleer, but y^t he durst not demaund the reason. After a while the Princesse to withdrawe hir sonne from his thought, or by some meanes to remitte his griefe & to cōfort him, stretching hir armes ouer his neck, said vnto him. "O my sonne Rosicleer, already thy valiant heart doth manifest that which so long time for mine honestie sake I haue concealed, this is that thou art the sonne of my Lord and lawful husband the prince Edward, begotten in wedlocke, but my parents vnwitting thervnto. Thy fathers likenesse in other qualities thou dost wel resemble, albeit his fauour is cleane out of my remembraunce. Thou canst not be content with the lyfe which thou nowe leadest, voyde of all daunger, but couetest to bée made knight, and to ieopard thy person in the search of aduentures as thy father did. This if thou doest so that I maye not beholde thée euery day, from that time make account of me as dead, for my great misfortunes together, with the double losse both of thy father and thy brother, in that order as thou hast knowen, hath by thy onely presence bene borne out and supported, and nowe depriued of this supporte muste I not yelde my backe to the burthen of continuall woe and myslykinge? Beholde then my childe the extreame griefe wherein thou findest mee, and for that as yet thou art younge of yeares, doe alwaye thys affection for a time, and héereafter when thou shalte bee of more strengthe and better able, to vndertake the enterprice of armes, I wyll so trauaile with the kinge my Lord, that he shall dubbe thée knight, and thou shalt haue horse & harnes at my charges

conformable to thy estate. In the meane while reste thée héere, for it may so bée that I shall in that time heare some newes of the Prince Edward or of Donzel del Febo, which if it so fall out, then shall thy absence be lesse grieuous vnto mée, when Rosicleer heard y^e secret which the Princesse his mother bewrayed vnto him, he was well apayed as touching his thought of béeing made knight, before the basenesse of his foster father hanging in his light, and now hée reckened the rather to vndertake the highest exploytes whereto his heart draue him, and knéeling downe before hir, he kissed hir hand for the secrecie which she concionated with him touching his true originall. His mother by the outward ioye he made, supposing his former thought to be put out of conceite was very glad, but y^e Princesse was deceiued in him. For Rosicleer hearing himselfe to bée named the sonne of so mighty princes, if before he wished to be made knight, either of a wanton delight or for some greater occasiō, now he thirsted gréedely after knighthood, as thincking himself bound in conscience to aduaunce his lignage in the right of his parents, and his care encreased howe to steale from thence. This care he couered the best wayes y^t he might, & stayed with his mother comforting hir in all that he coulde, vntill that the Princesse went to hir lodginge, and he retourned with Leonardo who onely hearde that which the Princesse had declared. But from that tyme foorth, as I saye, he canuased in his thought to and fro, the secrete meanes of hys escape, which he thought (though perhaps at first it might wringe some teares from so tender a Princes,) yet in processe of time woulde as well drye them vp, his valour making amendes for his sodeine departure.¶ Rosicleer departed from the monasterie of the ryuer without the knowledge of the Princesse his mother. Cap. 28.EYght dayes after Rosicleer knewe himselfe to bee the sonne of the Princesse his Lady, he abode with Leonardo casting how he might conuay himselfe from thence without the knowledge of any man. In the ende one night all the householde being on sléepe, his lodging standing in one corner seuered from the gentlewomens chamber, he tooke a sword which his nurse had giuen him, and out of a windowe looking into the gardeine he vaulted downe, and comming to the porters lodge he requested an horse of him, whereon sometimes before he had ridden, saying vnto him that his Lady the Princesse had sent him on a secret message. The Porter beleued him, and sadled an horse commending Rosicleer to God, who from thence rode so fast that by the morrow he was beyond hew and crye. Before noone the Princesse sente for him, but he coulde not be founde, then the Princesse gessing what it might be, was so sorrowfull that it little fayled of hir death, which assuredly she had not auoyded but that there came to hir remembraunce then that which the Nymph had foretold hir in the fountaine of hir loues as concerning hir losses, and so with some lyttle lyngring hope for the retourne of Fortune banishing all delyghts she shut hir selfe vp close in the monastery, more lyke an obseruant vowesse then a stately Princesse, whence also she neuer departed vntill that God had permitted hir to recouer hir husband, as shalbe tolde you.But to retourne vnto Rosicleer, being neither sicke nor wel at ease betwene the conceit of his mothers griefe, and the hope of being made knight by some aduenture. He gaue him selfe vnto y^t quest of seking Prince Edward & Donzel del Febo his brother, and therfore his entente was to passe into great Britaine to sée the king Oliuerio his grandfather as he had hearde, and by some good hap to be made knight. In this iourney he made so greate hast, that in short space he entred into Almaine, and ther trauailing by the ignoraunce of the way, one daye he lost

himselfe amongst the mountaynes which were thicke of tall woode, and other lower buske, seming to be no waye vnto him, and he strayed so long not finding his way that the Sunne was set ere he knew how to get out, wherefore hauing no other remedy he clymbed vp to the toppe thereof to take a view of the place on each side, and hee saw beneth him a déepe and large valley as it wer a mile from thence, enuironed with steepe and high hilles in which there wer some castells and other buyldings very faire and goodly. Now that it was nighte and that this was his onely refuge, he made his horse easely descende the hill, at the foote whereof he espyed a sauage Beare running from the towne with a childe in his mouthe of two yeares olde. The childe cryed so pitifully that Rosicleer tooke great compassion of it, and séeing it euen at the poynt to be deuoured, he ranne his horse with great fury towards the Beare. The Beare nothing afrighted at the noyse of the horse, stoode still with his praye in his mouth, and he so glared with his eyes setting his formost pawes for his defence, that although Rosicleer spurred him, his horse yet would not approch néerer. Then Rosicleer alyghted and fastening his horse to a trée, with his sword drawen when towarde the Beare, and the Beare seing him so make towardes him, lette the young childe fall vpon the grounde, and began to buskle himselfe to the fight with such a loude grone that he mighte haue feared a right good knight, but Rosicleer as it were dedicated to greater purposes then to be murthered by a bear, was nothing appalled at this, but whē y^e bear snapped at him to haue griped him betwen his arms, he gaue y^e bear a blow crossed y^e raines of y^e backe, y^t the Beare almost hewen in sunder fell deade to the grounde. Rosicleer by and by wiping his sworde in the grasse put it vp in his sheath and to the child he went which lay crying on the ground being also in his seming both beautiful and plesaunt and therefore lykely to haue bene taken from some of those

castels in y^e valley. By y^e time Rosicleer had ridden a myle in the valley he saw therein situate many castels and edifices so néere together as that y^e valley séemed to be wel peopled, and taking his way to the néerest, hee sawe two young men and an olde man with battayle axes in theire handes & in their armour ride in great hast as somewhat disquyeted, as they came nere to Rosicleer & sawe y^e childe whom they sought for, they were very glad, and well eying his good proportion and beautie sayd. God reward you faire gentleeman for you haue ridde vs of a great part of trouble which we shold haue suffred in seking this child, and we praye you on your fayth howe you came by him. Rosicleer saluting them courteously tolde them, that the childe was caryed by an vgly Beare, and that hee was fayne to set the childe frée by slaying the Beare. The men more amazed at this, gaue him great thancks & certefied him y^e most auncient in that company was y^e childes father, and that the other two were his bretheren, and that they walking on the battlements of their castle, and childe stoode at the porch, from whence the Beare had caryed him, and neighbours espying it had tolde which way the Beare ranne, vpon this wee prepared our selues, although we are sure that if you had not succoured him before, we should haue come to late for rescewes. Rosicleer then deliuered the childe to his father, whome the father kyssed with so great loue as if he had séen him newely raysed from the dead.Then y^e aunciēt man making his preface with a great sigh sayd. "Beautiful gentleman if you know how plentifully God hath bestowed his blessings vpon vs on y^e one part, and how iustly he hath scourged vs for our offences on the other part, you would not so highly commende of the frutefulnesse of y^e soyle, as greatly bewayle y^e misery of the inhabitaunts enduring such torments, as were neuer greater in y^e lande of Pharao." What great visitasion is this said Rosicleer, you make me muse on it. This plague

replyed the olde man "is so insupportable that diuers times the indwellers haue forsaken their countrey, and abandoned themselues to winde and weather, to auoyde the inconuenience of this place, but for that all my lyuing lyeth héere, and in other places I haue nothing whereby to maynteine my degrée, I driue out my dayes héere in sorrowe. The valley of it selfe is fatte, delectable, and holesome and so large that it conteyneth more then 2000 Castells and other houses all deuided as you sée. But I pray God our fulnesse of bread be not out iust vndooing as it was to the Sodomites. For we haue a Prince and Lorde ouer vs in times past good and gratious, but as God hath prouided for our mistyuing, in our time very cruell and vicious, he hath to name Argion, who according as his power by reason of his exceding wealth which the country yeldeth, is not to be contraried, so I beleue of lyfe he is the most peruerst and wickedest vnder heauen. For among other his diuelish & detestable customs which he ordinarily obserueth, & besides the impouerishing of his poore tenauntes racking them shamefully to enhaunce his tresory, and besides the dayly raunsoming of his neighbours lyues and goods at his pleasure for euery lyttle displeasure cōceiued against vs. This is one y^e most vngodly of al, y^t euery weke he enioineth vs to finde him a gētlewoman for his carnall liking. This vse he hath frequented this foure yeares so ouerawing vs and murtheringe such as make denyall that now there are none to make resistaunce, and hys fact now growen vnto a habite by our patience perforce, and his force in spight of our patience is nothing straunge vnto vs, that now all of vs obey his heast in being bawdes vnto our children, so that it would riue a mans heart a sunder to heare the faire damzells curse the lyght into the which their parents brought them only to fulfil the shamelesse lust of so tragicall a tyrant. And to my share it is falne that hauing one onely daughter the fayrest in all this valley, since she hath bene

fiftéene yeares of age I haue euery day expected hir sending for. If I ought coulde remedy it I would either murther my daughter or banish hir my countrey to release hir of so great an infamy: but Argion is so wicked and diuelish, that this will not suffise him, but rather if he be defrauded of his bargaine, wee shall all dye for hir sake." Héere y^e aūcient man was so ouertaken with griefe that he might not vtter a worde more, his name was Balides. Rosicleer angred at the heart to hear of the mallice of the wretch Argion, would haue giuen away the possibilitie of his lyueloode to haue bene made knight, onely to haue set the lande free from so intollerable slauery, and therfore he appoynted with himselfe when he were made knight to England, to retourne hether and to wage battayle with Argion. And so still deuising of such things he came to the castell of Balides, where he alyghted and was frindly entertayned by the auncient mans wife, and the young gentlewoman their daughter named Lyuerba, both greatly praysing Rosicleers good fauour and feature of body, but much more his courage when they vnderstoode that he had delyuered the childe by killyng the Beare. Rosicleer séeing the gentlewoman faire and proper, and yet very sad for that Argion had sent hir worde that he shortly looked for hir, was greatly moued, and the rather for y^t he knewe not how to acquit hir. Balides at his first comming in, commaunded the supper to bee made readye, in the meane while taking Rosicleer a side to a window opening into the valley, and questioning with him of his birth and of the aduenture which brought him thether. Rosicleer aunswered, "I am borne in Hungary, and I am to trauaile about my affayres into great Britayne, and being on my way this morning I lost my selfe in the woode, which was the occasion of my hether comming." In good time came you this way sayd Balides, for by you I haue recoured my sonne, and talking of such lyke matters they passed the time till supper was ready.¶ Rosicleer in Lyuerbas name slayeth Argion, and remoueth the Iewes. Cap. xxix.THe supper being ready Rosicleer, with Balides his wife and children sate at the table but there was little discourse at the boord saue that the beautifull Lyuerba felt so great griefe in y^e remembrance of Argions message that in lieu of meat she fed on teares, and hir parents helped to bere a part with their sighs, which made it a very melencholicke supper vnto Rosicleer. And in the necke of this, ere the cloth was taken vp, they hearde great rapping at the gate, and looking who they were, they saw more then xx. knights & other seruingmen, with torches in their handes at the gates. Those of the house demaunded what they would, one of them aunswered. Tell Balides that Argion our lord hath commaunded vs to bring Lyuerba by and by, for he tarieth for hir to haue hir company this night. O how vnwelcome was this arrant vnto the parents, and how pitifull vnto the gentlewoman, which swounded at the hearing of Argions name, and all the householde wepte bitterly. Rosicleer for company moued to great pitie, with the best courage that he might to giue remedye vnto this outrage, deuised a present shifte and bid some of the seruauntes to tell those which were without that they should stay a while vntill the gentlewomen were in a readines, and after that, that she should be sent vnto them. Then he made the coūlyest apparell which Lyuerba had to be brought vnto him, and clothed himselfe with all, making for his head a periwcke of Lyuerbas haire, & binding it with a little chain of gold, so that being thus readily arayed he was so beautifull as not gentlewoman thereabouts might parage him for grace or fauour. His hoste & hostes wer amazed in beholding him so well bere out y^e credite of a gentlewoman, in his disguised habite, neither yet knowing what he ment therby nor yet minding to learne it of him vnles he first declared it. But

so soone as he was throughly arayed in this wise, he softly rounded his hoste in the eare saying. "My friende your mishap & the thraldome of this lande hath had such force ouer me y^t hauing hope in God which brought me hether, I wil take vpon me to be Lyuerba and wil go with these knights to the castle of Argion. When I am alone in his chamber, I will behaue my selfe God willing, that I will frée you from this mans tyranny, Or alhough I be slain in the execution of this enterprice, yet it were a small damage in respect of so great a cure. But I would haue you Balides, your sonnes and your other acquaintaunce and friends to arme your selues lykewise and lye couertly a little from the castle, where if you sée that I make you any tokens by the lyght at a window make accounte that Argion is slayne, and be not afrayed to come néere the gates which I will set open for you & so with little adoe we shall make our selues Lords of his castle. When this is done we wil publish it abroade to the inhabitaunts of the valley, which being certein of Argions death will rise to our succour." Balides looked wisely vpon Rosicleer and wondred at his courage, for he being so young, it was in his fancie the boldest match which he had hearde off, yet, thoughe it was impossible as he thought to come to their purpose, for that he saw how willingly Rosicleer had made this offer, he consented to call his friendes, esteming it sarce better to dye in such a quarrell then to sée & suffer so great a mischefe. The gētlewomā Lyuerba being made priuie therevnto by hir father knéeled downe before Rosicleer, & shedding aboundance of teares sayd vnto him. "The God which created both heauen & earth graunt you faire gentlemā so good hap y^t both this land may be acquit from this tyranny, and I delyuered form this vilayny." The knights which were without hasted to haue the gentlewomā with them, & so Rosicleer putting a sword vnder his kirtle closely and surely that it coulde neither be perceiued, nor fall from him, hee tooke his leaue of Balides, 

his wife, and his daughter. Balides wishing him well and commending him to God, accompanied him to the gates where the knights were attendant, and there poured out so many teares to the outward sight as if it had bene his daughter. The people without hauing a glimps of Rosicleer by the lyght of the torches, tooke him to be the fayrest gentlewoman which they had eyer seene, and verye glad to bring so good tidings vnto their mayster, they set him vppon a palfray prouided for the purpose, only they were agrieued at the time which was so short that they could not sufficiently gaze on hir. Their whole talke by the way ran vpon this that it were for Argion more conuenient to detaine hir for wife, then euery wéeke to seeke a new, and laughing at their owne deuises they came to Argions Castle, being very great and of buylding the most sumptuous in the valley as it had bene a kings pallayce. In this they entered and helping the fayned Lyuerba from hir horse, they led hir vp a payre of staires into a chamber where Argion awited hir comming. Rosicleer kéeping a demure and sober countenaunce, droue Argion into a great amaze at his beautie, that gredely beholding him he arose from the place where he was sette, and embraced him in these termes. You are welcome hether my Lyuerba for you make me right gladde to haue your company, and for that your beautie is more then the rest, I wyll do you more honoure then to others. The fayned Lyuerba countenaunced out his counterfait with graue behauiour, onely fixing his eyes vpon the grounde, without aunswering a worde, saue that he thought vpon his purpose which he knewe would be somewhat daungerous in that Argion was strong, fowle, and fierce of looke more then he had euer seene any. Argion tooke him by the hande, and placed him next himselfe, demaunding first how hir parents did, and from thence he fell to more amorous delights, stil staring on Rosicleers beauty which throughly kindled his lust, and he desired hir to vnclothe

hir selfe, and to come vnto him in the rich bedde. This supposed Lyuerba framing a shamefast and bashfull looke, with a lowe voyce gentle aunswered him, "that unlesse he commaunded his seruants to auoyde the chamber and the doores to bée fastened, she would not be séene naked in that company." Argion taking it to bée an argument of great honestie did of his clothes first, and lepte into his bedde, commaunding his people to goe out, and shut y^e doores after them. They lighting a great candle set on a candlestick of siluer went out, & ther remained onely this Lyuerba with Argion, leisurely vnclothing hir selfe to delay time, and that the seruauntes shoulde mistrust naught by hearing a bustling in the chamber, first shée put off hir vpper gowne, then to hir peticoate, and so she stayed a whyle, Argion callinge on hir to dispatche quickely, as if the greatest part of his delight had bene to come. Rosicleer thincking it nowe time to discouer hir selfe, and that the houre was already come wherein God almightie woulde the wicked Argion to bé chastised, cast of his long garmet, & tourned himselfe into his doublet and hose, and hauing his sword drawen, he came to Argions bed side, saying, "come out of thy place where y^e art thou foule letcher, & come to reioice thée of Liuerbas loue, for very bitter shall this nightes rest bee vnto thée." Argion which behelde him rose vp lightly, and taking a swoorde which hong at hys beddes head, went towards Rosicleer to haue catched hym in his armes, but Rosicleer with his naked swoord watched him so y^t he smote the necke from the shoulders, the heade beating agaynst the wall, and the body falling headlesse to the grounde. This done, Rosicleer quietly sate downe in the same place, and thus remained till the greater parte of the nyght was spent. Balides nowe in this time had not forgotten his charge, and hauing talked with more then xx. of his friends, as concerning their entent, he easely perswaded them to this enterprise, so hauing thē in his company

with his sonnes he lodged néere to Argions castell, onely looking for a signe which Rosicleer should make them out at a windowe, which when Rosicleerhad for a time neclected, they supected y^e vnlikelihood of the fact, & had retourned closely to their homes, if y^t Rosicleer had not thē taking y^e light in his hand, opened y^e doores of the hall & shewed the tourch out of the window. Then they knew what had happened, & went ioyfully toward the castel. Rosicleer cōming downe, opened the gates, so that they all entered, & lighting many torches which they brought with them they cast thēselues into seuerall cōpanies to serch euery corner & ranging without feare, throughout the castel when they knew that Argion was slaine, & killing so many as they found that in déede though there were mo then an .100. knights and other seruaunts within the castel, yet all were slaine before they could puruay of armour, or thinck of remedy, in such sort that in the castel ther was not one left to take Argions part. At Argion may the stout Lords & vntamed tyrants take example of their endes, & make it a benefit of his fall, for although God sometime forbere the wicked giuing them space of amendement and repentaunce, yet when they can in no wise be reclaimed, his iustice must of necessitie correct them in the manner that both their bodyes repaye in this life their trespasses with cruell death and perpetuall deshonour, and their soules in the other world reciue dubble disgrace and horrour of conscience for their misdéedes: Howe many great Lordes & tyrants haue we read off to haue bene in the worlde, and howe fewe or none haue we heard off vnpunished which can be no other thing but that the diuine prouidence hathe so ordeined it, some to be chastised for the misgournment of themselues, and other some to amend by the terrour of others distruction: Well, the tyrant Argion thus béeing slaine with all this people, Balides and those which came with him for his great prowesse in killing Argion, sued vnto Rosicleer, to acknowledge them for his subiectes,

as they would willingly obey him for their Lord. But he seuerally making semblaunce of great loue to euery partie made them to rise, aduising them on this sort. That for their deliueraunce they ought to attribute it vnto God with harty thanckes for it which by his goodnesse had prouided y^e euill lust of wicked Argion should last no longer. But for that they called him their Lord, he said he would be their friend, and neuerthelesse sith they requested him therevnto, y^t he would not refuse their proffer, not for himselfe, but in déede to giue order to that whiche should succeede for the quiet gouerment of the seignorie. This done, Balides sent for his wife and his daughter Lyuerba, with his householde, they comming before Rosicleer gaue him thancks for this great good tourne in procuring their safetie. He receiued them with great pleasure, and they made méery all that night. The next daye they deuised for the publication of Argions death, which Balides made to be knowne to the most principall in the valley. They all very desirous of such newes came to the castell, where knowing the manner of Argions ende, much praysing the strength and boldenesse of Rosicleer, with all séeing him so well fauoured and of so younge yeares, they ceased not to giue hym thanckes for the good which he had done, so that Rosicleer somewhat blushing at it forbad them to speake more of it, but to attend their own affayres, for the valley béeing so replenished with dwellers all of them were not sounde, but for feare or fauour were Argions clawbackes. These they had to doe with all, and in theende suboued them, after wanting a gouernoure they besought Rosicleer to abyde wyth them and to take othes of their allegyaunce towardes him, for sith that by him they haue bene restored to their auncient lybertyes, they thought him to be an able maynteyner of theyr franchises, but Rosicleer made them aunswere, that at the sute of Lyuerba, Argion was slaine, and that hee moued with 

pitie vpon hir, had enterprised it for hir sake, if therefore he had deserued ought, he wished them in respect thereof to make Lyuerba mistresse of it, and for the establishment of hir possession to match hir vnto the chiefest inheritour of land and fée amongest them. This if they did for hys sake, he should account it not onely a satisfaction on their partes for the pleasure he had done them: but also a bond for a further good tourne if it so lye in his power. They debating vpon this matter were all contented with it and promised all their habilities to doe his commaund. So among them there was a knight called Brandidonio, the chiefest of all the valley, a proper and honest gentleman, Lord of thrée great castels, and beloued of al the countrey for his bountie and courtesie, him they chose to marrie with Lyuorba their Lady, Rosicleer very wel pleased with this gentlemans noble dispositiō, concluded vpon y^e marriage, so that in foure dayes the Lorde Brandidonio & the faire Lyuerba were created Lord & lady of the valley, and in token of obedience tooke the othe and assuraunce of their subiectes, where they liued longe time in quietnesse, their subiectes as well at ease to haue such gouernours.¶ Rosicleer departed from the valley of the mountaines, meeteth with two Princes christened, & by aduenture is carried from them againe. Cap. 30.ROSICLEER remayned foure dayes in the valley of the mountaines, for so it was called, to solemnize the marriage betwéene Brandidonio and Lyuerba, whereat the tenauntes of the valley béeinge presente, and séeinge his personage so tall and goodly, and ioyned with so good grace and gentle behauiour, iudged him a person rather celestiall than mortall, and beleeued that God had sente him for their deliueraunce, from

the miserable subiection wherin Argion had holden them, so they reuerenced and honoured hym, as if they had séene in him some vndoubted Image of immortalitie. But Rosicleer, this marriage béeing finished, hauinge no more to doe, make to assemble the greatest of the countrey, vnto whom he said, that he had vowed a voyage which might not be left off, and therefore now at his departure, he praied them to accept well of his so short tarrying, and in his absence to doe thée honour diligently to Brandidonio, and Lyuerba, which was due vnto their liege Lord and louing Lady. They ouercharged with griefe for the lacke of him whō they loued as their nigh kinsman, layd to stay him by giftes and other offers, but when it booted not, they swore faith and obeysaunce towardes their Lord, and for a remembraunce of their loue, they forced vpon Rosicleer an horse which was Argions, a very tall and stronge horse which he refused, not as beeing very commodious to trauaile with, and then after this tooke his leaue of Lyuerba, hir father and mother, and Brandidonio hir husband. Béeing ready to mounte on horsebacke, a younger brother of Lyuerbas called Telyo, throwing himselfe on hys knées before Rosicleer, besought him to graunte hys sute, which Rosicleer willingly promised, bidding hym saye on, Telyo then sayde. "Syr sith you are to trauayle alone, and haue none to serue you by the waye, maye it please you to shewe me the saueure as to reteyne me for your squyer." Rosicleer well pleased wyth the good affection whiche Telyo bare towardes hym, embraced Telyo with muche loue, and thus made aunswere. "Telyo thou art before hande wyth mée, for I haue gyuen thee thy requeste, so that I maye not excuse my selfe of my former promise, althoughe I woulde aduise thée rather to tarry at home in the delights of thine owne nation, then to put thy selfe in daunger in a forren and vnknowne countrey." Telyo gladder of this then of a good purchase, prepared all

things ready for their iourney, and tooke his leaue of hys Father, Mother, and kinsfolke, who were nothinge miscontent of his choyce, for that the company was suche as euery one coulde haue wyshed his rooms. Rosicleer and Telyo tooke on their waye, neyther speakinge to other, for the thought of theyr so louynge partinge from their friendes, whiche as yet stake freshe and gréene in their remembraunce. And sooth it is, that within a whyle after Rosicleers departure, to the ende the straungenesse of their deliuery might be renued by their posteritie, and no age should leaue to speake thereoff, they founded a house of religion wyth a fayre Temple, wherein at the one side of the hyghe Altar they erected a pyller of marble very fayre and curious, bearinge the true counterfette of Rosicleer, wyth the hystorye of Argion, the fréeing of Lyuerba, and all that consequently followeth in that storye, so that in longe time after thys monumente of restoringe the inhabitantes, was founde by our age in the pursute of aduentures in that countrey. Brandidonio, and Lyuerba héere ruled long time in peace and tranquilitie, and from them descended all the Lordes whiche since haue had the gouernaunce of that valley. But from thence to followe Rosicleer on hys waye, the history sayeth that wyth hys squire Telyo hée trauayled so longe throughe Almaine that hée came to an hauen of the Sea, in a manner directe agaynst greate Britaine in Picardy, where there were two great and fayre shyppes taryinge for the wynde to coaste ouer into Englande. Rosicleer hearinge of this in hys Inne, wente out of hys hostrye to the hauens mouth, there to speake wyth the master of the shyppe for to become a passenger, and comminge thether hée sawe manye knightes and other seruauntes by lykelyhoode of some worshipp passe to and fro which made him thincke it was no marchaunts vessell, but yet he entered the ship, & there espying two knights younge men, richly apparelled

and placed in two seuerall seates, to whome the other knightes in the shippe made their obeysaunce he tourned his face to haue gone out agayne. But the young knightes séeing Rosicleer and greatly delighted in his beautie and comlinesse of personage, called to him. Rosicleer tourninge towardes them made lowe reuerence as vnto so greate estates. The knightes receiuing him with as greate courtesy, demaundinge of him gentelye what countreyman hee was, and what he sought there. Rosicleer looking vpon them sadly, and soberly aunswered. "I am come my Lordes from the valley of the mountaynes, and I am desirous to see great Britaine, for my affaires whiche lye in that countrey, whether as I haue learned by others, your shippes are prepared, I am therefore to beséech you to do me the pleasure, as to graunt me passage in your company." They well contented withall, for that he was a younge gentleman excellinge in beautie all those which they had seene, tolde hym they were willinge therevnto, and that "if he néeded ought vnto this iourney, they woulde minister vnto his wantes." Rosicleer gaue them many thanckes for this their courtesy, but they demaunded farther howe he was called, and of what linage he came, to the first Rosicleer aunswered, that "his name was Rosicleer, and mindinge to cutte of the rest, he desired them to spare him for the other at that time, and to content themselues with this that hée nowe came from the valley of the mountaynes," wherefore they beléeued that he was naturally borne there. By this means Rosicleer was entertained with these Lords, and grewe farther in acquaintaunce wyth them, that hee knewe the one to bée Bargandel the Bohemian cousin Germaine to the Emperour Trebatio, and eldest sonne to the kynge of Bohemia, the other to bée the Prince Lyriamandro brother to the Princesse Briana, both of them of his nigh kinne.The Fortune which linked and conioyned these Princes in this amitie, was this. The king of the great Britaine called Oliuerio, considering that the losse of the Prince Edward his sonne, noised through his Empyre for .xv. yeares space had so appalled the courages of his knightes that neither feastes were made, nor turneys proclaymed, nor any disportes vsed with gentlewomen in his countrey, whereby to fyre the heartes of younge men to the déedes of armes. But that either all of them ouercome with griefe, and mourning still for his sonne, forsooke to weare armour, or els such as their owne good natures pricked forwardes to try aduentures, departed out of hys realme, in other regions to become famous, so that the kingdome of England was very naked of able Knightes to defende it, wheras before it was best knowne in all the world for knighthood and chiualrie. The kinge I saye, wisely casting of these thinges, did not nowe so muche lament the lacke of his sonne, as fearing the inconuenience which might ensue by the want to good soldiers, if any enimy shoulde arise, prouided against this mischeife on this sort.First taking the aduise of his counsell therein, he caused to bée proclaymed through euery shire and markette towne. That such knyghtes his subiectes as either were already departed, or nowe were in minde to depart the realme, for to surue in other Princes courtes, shoulde retourne to their homes by a day prefixed in the schedule, vppon payne of his high displeasure. This proclamation divulged abroade by the sound of a trumpet, as many as heard of it, either by their friendes letters, or by the rumour spred in other countries, retourned speadely, so that the king in a solumne triumph, taking the muster of hys speciall knightes, founde himselfe sufficiently furnished. Nowe the second care was, howe deteine them at home, and for this he deuised with his counsell to amke a highe feast in the Citie of London, with iustes and turneys, for

all knights aduenturous both Englishmen and foreiners, and to ordeyne suche prices as mighte inuite noble Princes thether. This thus agreed vpon the king Oliuerio a yeare before that these feasts should begin directed his letters to all Princes Christened and otherwise as farre Turkey certefiyng them that he had appoynted "iustes to be holden at his citye of London and prices for the best doers, and that thether it shoulde bee frée for all knights to come and try their forces." The price was a massy crowne of golde al sette with pearles and precious stones valued by al mens deeming at the price of a great Citie. The newes hereof by the kings letters spredde ouer all countryes entised these two Princes lykewise being but of young yeares to craue to be made knightes by their parents, & to trauayle towardes England. So hauing obtayned their purposes either of them prepared for his iourney, and mette together at one time in this hauen neither of them knowing other, nor of theire intentes, Whereafter they had knowledge each of other, and had concionated about their enterprice, they determined to go together as friendes, and had stayed thrée dayes for the winde ere Rosicleers comming, whom good fortune droue vnto the same coast, there to make an assurance of perfect friendshippe betwéene these thrée, lyke as she had earste done betwéene Donzel del Febo, Brandizel and Clauergudo. This knot betwéene thrée being the more insonable as both it hath more hope of sucour by the greater number, and represents in my fancy the figure of the triangle in Geometry, wyth this posy. Euery way the same. This amitie by degrées encreased as their acquaintaunce augmēted, for Rosicleer conuersation was so good y^t they wer very glad to haue his cōpany, but they lost him, ere they had throughly founde him, and as no pleasure in this worlde may dure: so at the time when these two Princes most ioyed in Rosicleers company, their pleasure was ouertourned and their delyght conuerted to mourning.For the next day the winde blowing very calme the mariners hoysed vp the sayles, and plyed their tacklinges so merily, that with great lyking of them all, they rode easely yet not so as they could attayne to the hauen, in good spéede, but that one euening when the Moone shone bright and the waues of the Sea were still and quyet, the two knights with Rosicleer betwéene them, leaned ouer the sides of the shippe reioycing all thrée at the brightnesse of the starres in the firmament, & at the delicate rombling, which the winde made in the bottome of the water. This was so pleasaunt vnto them as that in this contemplacion they spent the third parte of the night, about which time they heard the cry of a gentlewoman as it might be in some distresse. Then they looked baout them, and espyed a little crayer comming towardes them, in which there was a wilde man for making a Gyant, fierce of countenaunce and all hairy of body, of manners sauage, and cruell, hauing in one hande a knotted club wyth pikes at the ende of Iron, so heauy as a lesse man coulde not lyfte it: and in the other hande haling a faire gentlewoman by the hairs, hir face all bloody with the blowes he gaue hir, and punches with his feet. The Gyant full cryed. Tourne thy boate thou false and trayterous enchauntresse, or I will make thy lyfe to aunswere it mée, in that thou hast kepte me so long from it. The gentlewoman neuer aunswered him, but continually prayed vnto God for succours. This they both heard and sawe easely by Moonelyght, for the boate approched to their shippe, and the two other gentlemen were much abashed to sée so wilde a Gyant neere vnto them, for they had neuer seene his lyke before. But the noble courage of Rosicleer coulde not be so countermaunded by the Gyants hugenesse, as to suffer such vilany towards any gentlewomen, & therfore setting his foote vpon the side of y^e ship & taking his swoorde in his hand, he leaped into the gentlewomans boate.Nature as it wer willing to manifest hir owne works and to discouer the secret graces, which shee before had couered in his comely personage. For so as if he had long time experimented the daunger of conflicts, boldely hee tooke vpon him this aduenture. At his first comming into the boate he strake not the Gyant, but with great moderation and more discretion then was needefull (but that he was verye circumspecte and in all things lowly,) hee sayd vnto the Gyant. "Leaue of Gyant to entreat thys gentlewoman in this sort, and way well, that it is great shame to a man for to laye his handes vpon a woman." The great Gyant lyttle respecting this courtesie, left the gentlewoman to haue taken vp Rosicleer, & to haue throwen him into the water, but Rosicleer perceiuing him, put his naked sworde poinaunt before him.The Gyant rashly ranne vpon the swoorde, that it entred a lyttle, and therefore madde angrye at his wounde, he gaue backe, lyfting vp his greate batte with both hys handes to driue at Rosicleer. But Rosicleer as destenyed to greater exployts, watching the blowe starte aside, and closing with the Gyant thrust his sworde into his guttes. Rosicleer pulled out y^e sword hastely to haue giuē him an other blowe, bu thte Gyant fell vpon the planks gasping for breath: then Rosicleer stept vnto him, & with mayne force tombled him ouer shipboorde, wher he lay drenched in the Sea.All this the two Princes behelde and wondred at the great courage of Rosicleer, but not a lyttle diseased in that they coulde not helpe him. For when he leaped into the gentlewomans boate, they cryed a loude to theire knightes, to lette downe theire shipboate into the water, but it coulde not bee, before that the valyaunt youth had drenched the Gyant in the Sea, & that the gentlewomans boate rode with such swiftenes as in short time they lost the sight of it, with so much griefe vnto both these Princes as they might scarse speake the one to the other.For when they compared together the shortenesse of time in which they enioyed him, & in that short time the great prowesse which he had shewed before them, they coulde not easely asserteine themselues, whether they had dreamed of such things or séene them waking. But if so bee they were not beguyled either by a dreame, or some fantasticall illusion, I dare warrant they thought that in regarde of that which God had wrought by him, he could not be, but of noble estate. Well, when ther was no hope of following, they haled vp their boate againe to kéepe their course towardes Britaine, hauing hope to méete him ther, otherwise appoynting with themselues, if they ther fayled to go in quest of him.I may forgette to tell you of his squire Telyo but you may easely thincke of his paynes, by the loue he bare hys Lorde, and I will leaue him to your seuerall considerations of your selues in lyke cases, being farre from your country, and farder from your friende whome you haue preferred before your country, the rather to accompanye these noble gentlemen vnto the coast of England, which in their waye still kepte on their former dittie, euer talking of Rosicleer, either cōmending his good grace, or bewayling his departure, or blaming their own misfortunes, or extolling his strength, and euer the foote of their songe was, what should the swiftnesse of y^e boate meane & our sodayne acquaintaunce. Unto the depth whereof biscause they coulde not reache, thereby to quyet themselues, their sorrow redoubled by misiudging the worst. In the ende the winde was so good that it sette them on lande in the great Britaine not farre from London, where the kinge was resiaunt. Where as soone as they came one shore, before they presented themselues to the king they dispatched out one of their shippes with some of their knights and TelyoRosicleers squire to coast the same way which Rosicleer was gone, to the ende if Fortune were so fauourable to bring some tidings of him. Afterwards them

selues with the maiestie that doth belong to so greate Princes, tooke towards the great citie, viewing on euery side y^e great assembly of people, and y^e fields & high wayes besides townes and hamlets taken vp for knights, aswell straungers as naturall, and an infinite number of Ladies and gentlewomen, comming onely to see the tournayes. The two Princes sent two of their knights before hande to giue vnderstanding vnto the king of their comming. The king glad to haue the presence of so noble Princes at his high feast, with a great trayne of knights mette them without y^e citie, & comming towards them, embraced them with great loue. The storye leaueth to recount the words of courtesies, which passed betwéene them, and sayth that they entred into the pallaice with the king, and were lodged in one quarter thereof, himselfe kéeping his newe guests company that night, and talking with Liriamandro as concerning his daughter in lawe. At whom he learned the whole state of Hungarye with the appendices as touching that matter, which in some respect made him very sorowfull to heare of the continuall affliction wherwith Briana tormented hir selfe in the monastery of the riuer. And he was as greatly abashed to heare that in Greece they knew as little of the Emperour Trebatio, as in England he heard of the Prince Edward.Then Liriamandro espying the king somewhat inquisitiue, procéeded farther with his talke, in declaring the aduenture which had ioyned him & Bargandel, and how that they two mette at the hauen with a gentleman called Rosicleer and so consequently of the battaile with the Gyant, the king hearing of so many vertues in Rosicleer, as Liriamandro did his vttermoste to sette them foorthe, greatly wished to haue seene him. Héere the story leaueth the king and these Princes to the prouiding of thinges necessarye for the tilte, & goeth on with Rosicleer, whom these Princes lefte vpon the mayne Sea.¶ Certeine accidents which befell Rosicleer after his departure from the two Princes. Cap. 31.ROSICLEER made an ende of the battayle with y^e Gyant, & the gentlewoman so wel reuenged by his meanes kneeled down before him to haue kissed his hand & to giue him harty thācks for his his gret friendship shewed in working hir deliuery from the terrible Gyaunt. Rosicleer tooke hir vp, and demaunded of hir what shee was and by what aduenture she was broughte into the Gyants hande. The gentlewoman aunswered. "Knowe my Lorde that I am named Calinda, daughter to the wise man Artemidoro of whome peraduenture you haue hearde speaking before this time, inhabiting in an Iland not farre from hence in the midst of the Sea, which may neuer against his will be seene of anybody. This wyse man my father hauing sent me on a message in this boat to a friend of his, Lord of an Iland not farre hence, my Fortune was such, that when I retourned by this Gyants Iland there entring on lande for fresh water, I was espyed by this Gyant, who made to me to haue taken me, but I fled towards my boat which I could not recouer so soone, but that he entred with me. But as he shoued to land, my boat droue backward into y^e streme & had losse the sight of his Iland. The cruell Gyant séeing this, and thinking that I had done it by my knowledge, woulde haue killed mee, and entreated mee in such sorte as you saw. Now as for the lyghtenesse of the boate sir, I beleue sayth y^e gentlewoman, y^t it is guyded by my fathers Arte, and that we are on the way towarde his Ilande. Whereat gentleman I beséech you take no thought, although you have lost your company, for I doubte not but that by my fathers cunning you shalbe ioyned, & then my father shall serue you loyally, for the mercye you haue shewed me."Rosicleer much wondred both at y^e gentlewomans spech, and at the Gyants crueltie without good occasion, and especailly at the incredible swiftnesse of y^e bote, laylyng in the Sea, faster then a birde flyeth in the ayre, which made him iudge Artemidoro to be a very wise man, in that he had so great authoritye ouer the Sea. And therefore he reioyced himselfe vppon hope to sée the wise man at whome he might demaunde some newes as touching Prince Edward his father, and Donzel del Febo his brother. And for that he questioned with the gentlewoman many thinges as concerning hir father, of whome he lerned many things.Nowe as they talked of these thinges, the boat stode still as it had bene sanded. Rosicleer much abashed thereat looked on euery side what it should be that stayd it, and gaged the water with a poale, but he perceiued nothinge, wherfore he thought y^e peraduenture vnder the bote in y^e place wher laie some Adamant stone, of y^e vertue whereof he had red before times that it draweth yron vnto it, and stayeth the shippes which sayle ouer it. And as he was much perplexed in his thought, not knowing how to remedy it: he sawe before him a lyttle Ilande, the freshest and most delectable that in his lyfe he had seene, and the boate alreadye fastened to the bancke. Then the gentlewoman bad him not to feare, but to come out on lande, for the Ilande which he sawe before him was hir fathers Ilande.This was straunge vnto Rosicleer, to see the lyquyde Sea so soone conuerted to solide earthe, but he made not straunge to come on lande at hir bidding. Where by and by the wise man met them, a man by seeming very aged, his bearde all white and reaching to his wast, with a little white rodde in his hande, as some token either of his honour or profession. The wise man for the greate pleasure hee had to see Rosicleer, sayd vnto him on this

wise. "Right noble and most worthy Rosicleer, you are welome vnto this my country, for by your comming I haue bene more at my hearts ease then during my lyfe I haue ben, and many yeares past haue I longed for your presence. For although I knew for a certeinty that hether you should come, yet the time when, I knew not, which hath hetherto bene concealed from mortall men, and only made knowne to God himselfe. I knewe lykewyse so soone as my daughter Calinda was borne, that she should be sette frée from cruell captiuitie and perpetual dishonor by you onely, but the matter howe, was not reuealed withall, onely that it should be when the prouidence of God directed by his wyll, committed the execution thereof to Fortune. Thus may we men for all our cunninge neither alter the course of things appoynted by destenye, nor yet finde other remedy then is permitted by the foreknowledge of God. As this my daughter coulde neuer haue bene saued but onely in that same manner as you gaue hir succour. The reason was, bicause my knowledge coulde not wade so déepe as to forsée euery thinge concluded by destenyes, the selfe same thing being subiect vnder the lyne of destenye, that I should not perceiue it. So my daughter went on lande vnto the Gyants Iland, which I neither foresawe to preuent, nor could haue preuented if I had forséene. Yet that which was in my power I so ruled the boate that it came to your shippe, thereby to haue reliefe at your hands for my care. This haue I tolde you at large the inhabilitie of our cunninge against the influence of y^e stars, wherby you may perceiue how much I am beholding vnto you, the rather to make bolde vppon my seruice, if in any respect either my Art or my armour may doe you pleasure."Rosicleer attentiuely lystening vnto the wise mans discourse, in the ende gaue him great thanckes for his so lyberall offer, promising lykewise the seruice of his body, for other thing had he nought, to do his commaund in any

matter reasonable. With this the wise man tooke hym by the hand, and lead him towarde a great and beautifull pallaice seated vpon the shore. Rosicleer with a curious eye gased on each part of the pallaice, so situate in an vnknowne Iland, and was nauer content, for in déede y^e subteltie of y^e workmanship surpassed y^e far craft of masonry in our daies. But here he abode ij. daies with Artemidoro, serued of delicate viandes and strange deuises, able to quicken a dead mans stomacke, béeing héere better pleased with his entertainment then he was euer otherwise. One day sittinge at the boarde with Rosicleer, the wise man espying hym ouccupyed in his thought about hys iourney to England, sported wyth him in this sorte. "Rosicleer, I sée wel this coūtrey bréedeth not such things as may content your appetie, and I holde you excused, for your desire coueteth after Mars and Martiall feates, wherefore as my learning sheweth me, your lust carrieth your stomacke into England, ther to be knighted. Truely faire sir you haue good reasō therevnto, for the time is at hande wherein your knighthoode muste bee manifested. But for to doe you honour I my selfe will attende you thether, in respect both of your friendship paste towardes my daughter Calinda, and other greater matters to come which I hope shall bée accomplished. I knowe not in déede the time when it shall bée, neither the manner howe, but this I knowe, that by your meanes I shall once escape the death. Nowe as well for your owne sake béeinge for the very moment of your byrth illumined with more then mortall graces, as I haue already engrossed the dolorous lyfe of the Princesse Briana, so wyll I be also the regester of your actes, to enroll your memory in the recordes of fame, that it shall bée maynteinable agaynst all counterpleas, and forged euidences. Thys will I doe for you besides the perpetuitie of my seruice in other matters, and for your brother Donzel del Febo he hathe already found a 

cronicler (meaning this by Lyrgandeo) such as his worthinesse meriteth. Rosicleer tickeled at his talk, touching his brother Donzel del Febo, bowed himselfe thanckfully and requested him to goe on, sayinge. Ryght honourable Syr, séeinge you haue entered into thys discourse, I praye you continue it, for I knewe naught as pertayning to this my brother, saue that he was loste in the Sea béeing very younge, and I haue hitherto thought that hée had bene deade, and sith nothing is hid from your knowledge, I pray you likewise satisfie me in y^e same manner as concerninge the Prince Edward my Father, that I maye séeke hym if there bée hope of findinge on this earth. Most noble Prince aunswered the wyse man, you drawe me vnto a longe tale, and in some poynt nothinge pertinent to you. But knowe for a truth that the gentleman of the Sunne your brother is aliue already knighted, and for hys first prises he hath achyued suche meruaylous déedes of armes, as that it standeth you in hande to besturre your selfe if you mynde to be matchable, béeinge the onely man as yet vnparagonized through the worlde. Hée is nowe in a countrey where wythout knowledge of hys estate, he is notwithstandinge muche praysed for his personage, the regyon so farre dystant from thys our clymate, that if you put your selfe on the waye to séeke hym, your payne shoulde bee infinite and as I can learne néedelesse, for ere that you passe our of thys countrey hée wyll come to séeke you heere. Nowe as to your demaunde touching the Prince Edward whome you call you Father. I doe you to wytte that hée was deade before that you were begotten, and that the royall Princesse your mother nowe destitute of an husbande, shall in tyme recouer hir lawefull husbande, and you shall knowe your Father, for the greatest and mightiest Prince christened. Furthermore bycause it is forbidden mée to discouer of the greate secretes of

God, vntyll it be his pleasure that all men shall knowe it, I maye not aunswere you, but the euente shall witnesse wyth my prophecie." Nowe wyll I make ready for your passage into Britaine, for there muste bée shewed the first flowre of your manhood. Rosicleer was greatly confused in his vnderstāding, at the words which y^e wyse man spake béeing yet plaine & easy, and he able to make English of euery woorde, but the cause was, for that he was vnable to finde out y^e true sence which this diuinitie carried, béeing repugnannt to hys former beléefe. So hacking and gessinge about it to make lykelihoodes of impossibilities, and examining euery point by it selfe, yet coulde he neuer bee setled nor make good construction of it. For his mother tolde hym that prince Edwarde was his Father. The wise man deliuered the contrary. And if his Mother knewe his Father, then howe coulde his Father be dead ere he was begotten, and howe coulde his mother recouer hir lawefull husband béeinge dead, and howe coulde his father become such a monarch after his discease, and so foorth. Nowe if he gaue credit to the wise man, yet no man better knoweth the childes father then the mother. So that for reuerence of the wyse man, and to reconcile hys mothers woordes with the wise mans réede, he framed to hymselfe for that time a newe article of beliefe that one thinge myght be, and not bee. Yet time founde out a better solution of this sophisme. For thys time seeing it was no reason to importunate the wyse man vppon this matter, it contented hym to knowe for a truth that Donzel del Febo his brother was yet alyue, and hee gaue hym hartye thanckes for the courtesie hee had shewed hym heerein. But for his voyage into Englande, hee lefte that to hys direction, sith hee perceiued his meaning therein. The wyse man sayde it should be so prouided for, as best beseemed his honour. The third day after when al things were in a readinesse, 
Artemidoro brought out of his armory a riche armoure and gaue it to Rosicleer. The armour was framed so cunningly, as for workmanshippe, cost, and secret vertue, it excelled all that I haue séene. It was closely wrought, couriously engrauen, enchased with precious stones, and aboue all this efficacie, that it resisted the edge of all mettall, this effect procéeding either form the stones, or the examination of the ascendentes in the forginge thereoff. The colour of the armour was all whyte, well fittinge for a newe knyght. Artemidoro gaue at the same time to Rosicleer a bay courser strōg & wighte of limb, which hee had bought for that purpose in the countrey of Spayne where the best bréede of such horses were. And after all things set in order thus for their iourney, taking men w^t them for their necessary vses, they shypped thēselnes in a faire Bark, sayling with great swiftnesse, as the wyse Artemidoro had by his skyll directed it, in which iourney the history leaueth them tyll theyr sodeyne approche vnto the lysts, within great Britaine,¶ The great feastes began in Oliuerios court. Cap. 32.IN the freshe and pleasaunt moneth of May, when the gréene boughes and swéete smellinge flowers renue ioye and gladnesse in the heartes of young folke, the great Citie of London and wyde fieldes ther eaboute séemed not lesse couered with armed knight sthen if the mightie hoastes of Darius and Alexander had thether assembled, for the great feasts and iustes were so diligently published in euery region & countrey, & the prises which the kinge had set were of such valour, that there came thether from diuers farre and straunge lands so many knights & ladies as that the number of thē was infinit. Now that y^t especially drew yoūg princes & men of great name thether, was this. The king Oliuerio had a

daughter named Oliuia the onely enheritrix of his kingdome, of y^e age of xiiij. yeares, a beautifull & delicate damsel, as not hir lyke might be found in all y^e quarters. For y^e fame of hir singuler beautie, thether came many noble princes & worthy knights to win hir liking, each of them wearing so rich and quaint deuises, that their brauery in short time exiled the longe mourning which had continued in great Britaine. The myrth which they made, much delighted the king Oliuerio, and it ioyed hym much to see hys courte and countrey so well stored of knyghtes and Princes to whome hee gaue honourable entertainment and countenaunce of good wyll, as well of his owne subiectes as straungers, and all were well content with all highly commending of his courte, for magnificence and courtisie. The kinge at thys time was a wyddower, and therfore he sought much the honour of the Princesse his daughter. But to come to our matter amongst y^e knights straungers: The two Princes Bargandel and Lyriamandro bare the greatest stroke: next Don Siluerio Prince of Lusitania a younge knyght and valiant in armes, already enamored vppon the fayre princesse Oliuia, for whom he had bene a longe time suter in the kinges pallayce, presuming vpon his byrth & liuelihood that she should be graunted vnto him, & as it fell out y^e princesse vnderstood some part of his desire, but she was of an hautie heart and hyghe minde, makinge no more account of Don Siluerio in respect of that demaund, then of an other ordinary knight, or the refuse of other. For amongest all which were already come, she thought none merited to be a péere and match for hir beautie, béeing (as my authoour saith, such in his owne conceite as if no Prince were worthy of it). But the truth is that y^e blinde boy shooting at random had ouerreached his marke as appeared in the second shot at the comming in of Rosicleer. In y^e third place there came into this triumph the Prince of Ireland called Argiles, & Don Orgiles prince of Scot-land & Allamades king of Cornewaile, all thrée vassals & subiectes to y^e king Oliuerio. The fourth roome was assigned to Don Brynco Prince of Numidio in Africk bringing frō his countrey many valiant knights richly armed, & with thē Albalaxes king of Mauritania a Pagan yoūg & lusty. Ther came thether also two gyants of an admirable height & fiercenes, being such a terrour to y^e poore cōminalty enhabiting y^e villages nere to London, y^t the poore mans feare made them the more insolent to commit diuers ryots and other trespasses before the feastes began. This was the seuerall countenaunces of the knyghtes of most account, but to make short, there came besides many other knighes both Christians and Pagans vnder the kings writ of safeconduct whiche himselfe gaue out. That neuer England more flourished of knightes, nor neuer nation was lyke to England. But nowe the first daye of the iustes before they should ryde to the tylte, the kinge Oliuerio inuited all the kinges and Princes to dinner in his pallaice, where they were feasted royally and with great melody. After the tables taken vp, the knyghtes went to arme themselues, and the kinge conducted by the auncient Lordes and Barons of hys court tooke vp his seate in a windowe ouer the tiltyarde, and vppon a scaffolde before him reared for that prupose, he commaunded the prices to bée put, whiche were dyuers, for vnto the crowne before spoken off, hee added a choller of lyke valure, and many other iewels able, for the honour of atteininge them and the worthinesse thereoff, to animate a dastard knyght to such an enterprise. After this the Princesse Oliuia comming foorth of the great pallaice with an 100. ladies and gentlewomen mounted vpon a stately scaffolde very richly hanged. Among these Ladyes ther was y^e princesse Siluerina daughter to the king of Scotland, & Rodosylua princesse of Lusitania sister to Don Siluerio, and many other Ladyes and daughters vnto the great Lordes of Britaine.But in the middest of these the fayre Princesse Oliuia shewed not lesse maiesty then the fresh and fragrant rose doth among the briers and stinking nettles, which notwithstanding haue their commendation for their gréene and liuely verdure. But the scaffolde béeing filde with ladyes and gentlewomen, there came the knights in place, most of them young and shining in their bright armour. The first that pricked himselfe forwarde to iuste ws Allamades king of Cornewaile, a very good & tried knight, against whome there came to encounter an other abled knight an Almaine set vpon a strong courser. In theyr shocke their speares flew in shiuers, & the king Allamades somewhat staggering in his saddle vnhorsed y^e Almaine, after him there came .x. other knights straungers more bolde then skilfull in feates of armes, all whiche the valyant Allamades ouerthrewe, with great pleasure to the kynge and all his court. Then the kinge called for hys knightes, with this Allamades to gyue them place voyded the lystes, and there entered Argiles Prince of Ireland, which with eyght seuerall courses brake eyght speares, and ouerthrewe eyght knyghtes. After hym Don Orgiles Prince of Scotland came, whom when Argiles espyed, not mindinge to disturbe hym, hée rode vnto the lystes ende, Orgiles wythout béeinge moued in hys saddle cast downe twelue knyghtes, and then followed hys fellowe Argiles. By and by Don Siluerio came in wyth a guilte armour gorgious to beholde, and his horse barbed wyth clothe of golde cutte vppon siluer Imagerie, béeinge a lustye and valiaunte Knyght, and as the thoughtes of the Princesse Oliuia emboldened his courage, so besides the hautinesse of hys stomack contemned all other knightes in respect of hymselfe. In his iourney he dismounted xx. knights within less then halfe an houre, so that many thought he would wyn the honour of that day. But straight waye there preased forwarde the two Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro, 

hauing in their company more then 200. knightes, wyth their haraldes crying before them, Bohemia, Bohemia, Hungaria, Hungaria. The two Princes rode vpon fayre and strong coursers, richly armed as became their estates, their lustinesse béeinge enflamed by their loues, for since their comming to the English court, they were esprysed with loue. Bargandel of the Princesse Syluerina, and Lyriamandro of the Princesse Rodasylua, and hauinge obteined the good fauoures of their Ladyes, they payned themselues to be as boulde as the brauest. So findinge the tylt emptie by Siluerios departing, they praunced forwarde till other knightes came agaynst them. And eyther of them in their turnes, before they left the liftes, ouerthrew at the least 30. knights a péece, so blasing their prowesse by the force they shewed, that the kynge and other beholders chaunged their opinion as touchinge Don Siluerio. Upon this the two Princes glad of that dayes trauayle, and vaunting themselues before their mystresses made roome for other to doe their endeuoures. After these the valiant and hardy knightes of the Englyshe court came in against the straungers of other countries, where the Englysh men so behaued themselues as that dayes honour was theirs. Nowe as the kinge was in talke wyth his Lordes aboute the glorye whiche hys men had gotten, and euery man was attentiue to that which was before hym. Sodeinly there was hearde a great crye amongest the people on the backe side of the lists, no man knowing what it meant. By and by there came foorth a tall Gyant wyth a traine of more then xx. knightes vpon a stone horse which groned in a manner vnder his weight. The Gyant commaundinge his knightes to stande a side, went alone to the windowe where the king was, there raysing vp his beueare and forcing out a terrible looke, without other reuerence, hée spake on this wise. "King Oliuerio I am Brandagedeon, Lorde of the Ilandes Baleance, and am hether come bi-

cause of the prices which thou haste appointed for the best dooers, I am well knowne in all the heathen countrey, for by the power which my Gods haue emparted with me, there is no mortall man that may gaynstande my puissance, and for that this day thou shalt haue some triall of this truth, beholde before the night be shutte in, there shall no knight of all these which are héere kéepe his saddell, vnlesse he kéepe himselfe from me." And so in great pride, as you may presume by y^e course of his speach he vttered this, and pulled downe his visoure. Then with a great speare in his hand, he tooke the one ende of the payle. This his comming was nothing pleasaunt to the king, for since his arriuall in that kingdome, hee had done many outrages to the poore subiects of the land. And the king feared least the knights of his courte, should not be be able to maintaine their honour againste him. Nowe this monstrous Gyant had not stayed there long, but that a valyant knight a Britaine called Brandaristes made a signe vnto him.These two ranne together, and in their shocke Brandaristes with his horse fell to grounde: but the Gyant nothing diseased, held on his way toward an other knight by name Brandidarte, a Britaine to, a braue knighte and as bolde as Gawayne, but the Gyant welcommed him lyke as the other, and thus in shorte time the Gyant prouing himselfe vpon more then an 100 knights of the hardyest both straungers and Englishmen, he made them all to descende from their horses, that the kinge Oliuerio was much disquyeted hereat, & wold haue bought out the Gyāts presēce if he might, for more thLondon is worth euer for y^e pitie which he had vpon his knights, not possibly able to withstande this Gyant. The kingAllamades beholding the kings countenaunce sadde and gessing the cause, woulde needes aduenture the honoure which hee before gayned vpon the vanquish of such a Gyant, and taking a fresh horse with a choyse speare from the ratler

he rode to Brandagedeon whome the Gyant mette so forcibly that Allamedes lay on the ground, and Brandagedeon dressing himsefe in his saddle passed on. By and by Orgiles Prince of Ireland sette vppon the Gyant, which somewhat estonished him: but neuertheles Orgiles happe for himselfe was in no other manner then his fellowes. Then came in done Don Argiles to take Orgiles parte, and fiercely encountred the Gyant, but to y^e same purpose. Now was Don Syluerio ashamed before the Princesse Oliuia to haue taryed behinde so many good knights, and therefore forcing his courage to please his Lady vppon a lyght courser he ranne against Brandagedeon, & his Fortune was so good that he made Brandagedeon to lose one of his stirops and the raynes of his bridell, but Brandagedeon quitted this with more then a tollerable vsury, for he carried him beyond y^e crouper almost a speares length, which disgrace before his Lady Oliuia made him woode angry, and willyngly would he haue challenged the combat, if both leysure and place had bene conuenient. Not long after the Prince Bargandel gathering his forces at the beholding of the Princesse Syluerina went to encounter the Gyant, either of them being well heated, but diuersly, as arising of diuers causes, but their strengthes encreased by their heates, made their shocks to terrible as neither parte had great aduantage. The Gyant fell vpon the crouper of his horse and rode the length of a caryer ere he might arise agayn. Bargandel fel to the ground with his horse vnder him. Thus made him hange his heade, and styred vp his friend Liriamandro for his succours, who caused Brandagedeon to embrace the saddell bowe, himselfe being cleane lyfte out of the saddell by Brandagedeon the Gyant, and Liriamandro laye on the grounde to complaine him of his mishappe before his mistres Rodasylua. After these ther was none left so hardy, as to dare encounter Brandagedeon, which caused y^e king and other Princes to looke rufully, & the Gyant to beare

himselfe as insolently, for when there was none lefte he lyfte vp his voyce in these termes. "Come forthe, come forthe, ye knights of the hreatBritaine, & either knowe what the force of Brandagedeon is, or if you dare not appeare, sende me the prices presently, for to none of the worlde thy doe so rightly apperteyne as to me," and this saying, he gallopped vp and downe in the place, expecting either some knight or the prices. The king seing none come to aunswere his challenge was verye angrye and would haue giuen his best town to haue had a knight which coulde haue quayled the Gyants courage, and for very griefe he tourned himselfe from the windowe, tyll the sodayne shoote of the people, caused him to looke out agayne.Then he espyed the people flocking together towards one corner of the lyste, and in the midst of them an aged man with a long white bearde riding softly on a Mule, and bearing the countenaunce of a very wise man. After him he sawe a knight well harnessed in white armour, richly besette with precious stones so that no man in the place had the lyke, his helmette had a fine plume and his horse the lyke, the pomell of his saddell of Goldesmithes caruing, and the seate all embrodered with golde and siluer. Euery thing belonging to the knighte so braue and lustye, that none nowe but gazed on the straunger. After him a good distaunce there rode a gentlewoman an easye pace vppon a palfraye driuing before hir a sumptuous horse.The gentlewoman comminge néere vnto the pallaice alyghted, and vnlacing hir male, spredde a faire tente in the playne, made all of clothe of golde, with suche straunge deuises, that neyther kynge nor keysar in the worlde but myghte haue vouchsafed it for hymselfe. But that whiche was most commendable, was the most excelent and braue conceits with néedeleworke which could neuer haue bene wrought but by an exquisite

semster, as in déede y^e wise Artemidoro was the workeman. Now to make short worke, when the pauilion was pyghte, Artemidoro leading Rosicleer with him vnto the king, spake on this wise."God encrease thy royall estate king of the great Britaine, & aduaunce the credite of thy whole courte. Whitte you most puyssaunt Prince, that from mine Ilande I am hether come with this young gentleman, that he may be knighted by your owne hands. And albeit y^t so greate a courtesie neither he nor I haue merited of your maiestie, yet vnderstande worthy king that for his lygnage hée is such a one as not without reson he may craue to be dubbed knight of so mightie a Prince as you are. And I dare warrant moreouer that it shall not be yll bestowed on him, as your selfe shall testefie in shorte time, althoughe you shall not throughlye enter into the consideration of his valour, til that his death be publyshed by reporte of his drowninge, and that much bloode shalbee spilt to the greater prayse of his prowesse, to the contentacion of your preson, and to the profite of your royall estate, and bée it my tale séeme incredible yet I beséech you to remember it well, for I wil auouch y^e euent as I haue told you. Retayne him therefore sir king in your courte, and beleue that the time shall come wherin you woulde lose the best part of your kingdome to haue him néere you. But to the ende, this story now auerred by mee, maye carrye more authoritie with your worthy person. Knowe that this reporter is Artemidoro of whose knoweledge you haue hearde before. For with my skill I haue done seruice to such great Lords as you are. Artemidoro heere making a reasonable pawse, beganne agayne on this wyse. Syr king with your maiestyes leaue, we haue heare pitched a tent in the name of the gentleman, as a challenge against all commers after you haue made him knighte. the first which shall vnhorse him, shall enioy this tente, the value wherof may content him for his iourney," and

héere staying he sayd. Sir king I haue done. King Oliuerio all this while not lending his eares idelly, as to a fable in a wynter nighte, but waying euery point, looked vppon Rosicleer, and well thoughte that his personage might agrée with Artemidoros commendacion, but yet as halfe in a doubt as touching himselfe he made y^e wise man this aunswere. "Assuredly Artemidoro with this demaund or any other which you shall require, I am verye glad that you take occasion of comming to my court, for by the brute of your fame, I haue long time wished to se you: but to sende for you in déede, I was neuer minded, bicause as I hear, against your wil no man may speke with you. And to make you answer, I am in purpose to satisfie you, aswell for your owne sake, as for this gentlemans, whose behauiour séemeth to be such, as w^tout your report he cōmeth sufficiently cōmended vnto me. I promise you héere to make him knighte with mine owne handes, & I beséech God he proue no worse then you foreshew mée." Rosicleer and the wise man bothe bowed humblye on their horsebacks.The king badde Rosicleer to alyght, which dismounting from his horse ascended by a payre of stayres to a little scaffolde before the kings windowe, where knéeling downe in the sight of the whole multitude, he receiued the order of knighthood at the kings hands. The king demaunded wher the young knight should receiue y^e sword, and the wise man aunswered that he should staye for that till he could conquer it. Then after the duetie done to the king, Rosicleer retourned to horsebacke, and wyth a lyuelye grace so demeaned himselfe uppon him horse, as that it well pleased the beholders. Now for that which followeth you must entend that the wise man vttered his speaches to the king in the audience of the whole multitude, many knyghtes and other compassing him about to heare his arraunt, so that fewe or none but were partakers of it. Amongst them as Brandagedeon bea-

ring himselfe within the lystes as proudly, as the Cocke of the game doth in the Cockepit when the crauen is chased. Then hearing that the tent was put for a rewarde to him which coulde vnhorse the young knight, when he saw time he cryed aloude to Rosicleer saying. "In good faith new knight thou bewrayest thy folly and lacke of experiance, when thou sawest me stand in this place with my speare in my hande to make that challenge, which shall not be in thy power to maintayne so surely, but that I wilbe the mayster of thy pauilyon, & yet Gods blessing on thy heart for bringing so fayre a Jewell being in déed fitter for me then for thée. Rosicleer whose courage neuer taynted, aunswered as shortly. It shalbe thine Gyant if thou winnest it, and there shall no man forbid thée the possession of it if thou ouerthrowe me." And without more wordes he tooke a great speare from the ratler, and tourning his horse heade he rode softly to the place wher the iustes were kept. In hys way thether, Rosicleer lyfting vp his eyes to the scaffolde of the gentlewomen, he sawe the beautifull Oliuia standing directly agaynst his face, excéeding no lesse the other gentlewomen in brightnesse then the Moone excelleth the starres in a frosty night. O poore Rosicleer what a looke was that which locked thée from thy rest, for with hir beautie thou wast wounded at the heart, that albeit in time the skinne euergrew it and the flesh healed, yet the skarre remayned: & neuer knight in the worlde loued more loyally then thou didst. For though the sight was short and the blowe quicke, yet the wounde was déepe and the smart cureles. O full many a bolde enterprice diddest thou achieue ere thou gaynedst a reasonable guerdon for thy greate good will. And thou faire Princesse, being within the hearing of the wise mans speach, diddest not spare to lende thine eares to an other mans tale, and thine eyes to an other mans brauerye, that thy succours being farre from thée, they hearte had not the power to repulse thy aduersarye, loue being the

onely occasion of thy vnrest. But Lorde what alteracion both of you felte by the enterchange of your lookes, which serued lykewise for messengers to tell your tales betwixt you.And yet I cannot déeme but that this loue so enraged his courage against Brandagedeon as otherwise I maye thincke he had not done so well. But comming into the place, hee addressed himselfe towardes Brandagedeon, both of them now being in a readinesse. The kynge at this tyme very sorrowfull to sée the newe knighte in his first battayle to endaunger himselfe vpon a Gyant, and woulde haue talked with Artemidoro about this matter, but the wyse man gaue no aunswere, and to the ende not to discouer more then was behouefull, hee conuayed himselfe out of the kinges sighte. So the kynge helde still his opinion of the young knightes weakenes, till the issue disproued his thought.For in the caryer when the two knights mette in the middest of the tylteyearde, the Gyants speare burst vpon Rosicleers headpéece, no more mouinge him with the blowe, then if hee had stroke against a wall. But Rosicleer hurlying at the breast of Brandagedeon ouerthrew him and his horse to the grounde, the horse in the fall, brusinge the Gyantes shoulder, that his knightes were fayne to carry himn out of the prease, wherat all the standers by with great admiration behelde Rosicleer, eueryeman being a Prophet as his heart gaue him, that Rosicleer woulde proue the beste knyghte in the worlde, seing that at his first encounter in tilte hauing neuer had to doe with any knighte before he had ouerthrowen so mightie a Gyant.The king nowe thought that Rosicleer had well amended the greate corsie whiche hee had taken at his knightes dysgrace, and the other knightes were glad to haue that huge monster ryd awaye, bolder and wyllynger valyauntly to aduenture themselues againste
Rosicleer then againste a Gyant and their courage was the more for the richnesse of the tent which had inuegled their couetous mindes to venture the purchase. But as the knights entred to iuste with him, he ouerthrew them all, being more then an 100 knights, without that any man was able to sit the seconde iourney. Then the kings knights entred by name Brandaristes, Allamedes the Princes Argiles and Orgiles, Don Brunio Prince of Numidia and other, al which he threw down so lyghtlye as that they mighte not tourne one course more that daye. Some helde more tacke with him as you shall heare hereafter, but by the way the king tourning to his Lords, spake on this wise."Truly my Lords, if I had not my selfe séene the valourous déedes of this knight, I should hardly haue credited an other, so incredible the truth is that one shoulde worke such masteries. I would the iusts were ended that I might see this knight vnarmed to know him and honour him as is reason. True it is aunswered his nobles, and for his valour there is not so puyssaunt a Prince in the worlde, but that he shall haue cause to be glad of hys seruice." This was a breathing time for Rosicleer, but yet I am perswaded that it was no playing time although no enemye appeared, for he had a greater conflict within his bones then he professed outwardly, and therefore his heart neither fully assured, nor yet in daunger, gased vppon the beautie of Oliuia. Wherby the fire entring closely by the vaynes wasted and consumed his fleshe, sooner then he felte the flame, or coulde thincke of remedye: but better consideringe that hee was within the compasse of loues segniorye, and that his matter was to bee tryed at the great Assise in loues dominion, he tooke better aduisement, to alter it to an action vpon the case of couenaunte agaynst his mistresse, the matter arising vpon exchaunge of lookes as you haue heard. And for this cause he entertayned Sergeaunt Hope to be his Lawyer, and feeyd

diuers others to assist him, but matter Dispayre an olde ager had wonne the daye of him, had not the whole bench, & especially the chiefe Justice Desert, stayed vpon a demur, which relieued much Rosicleers courage and made him looke more freshly vpon hope to finde out better euidence for recouery of his sute. But as Rosicleer thus plyed his cause at the barre, so gentle Cupid attended vpon his mistresse, faithfully seruing him, and beatinge into hir head the remembraunce of his actes and the beautie of his personage, that the wyndowes of hir desire béeing sette wyde open, she vewed hir fill wyshinge yet to sée his face, thereby to comfort hir selfe is his visage were aunswerable to hys vertue. Nowe Don Siluerio with an enuious eye, mynding to interrupte this medlea, prouoked Rosicleer to the lystes, whiche Rosicleer refused not. Rosicleer shaked somewhat in hys saddle, but yet withoute daunger of fallinge and Don Siluerio with his courser tumbled to the grounde, so euill entreated as that hée was faine to forsake the lystes. The Princesse Oliuia remembringe his former importunitie was nothing agreeued, thinckinge thereby hys sute to haue slaked, the rather to delight in hir newe champion. By thys tyme the greater parte of the afternoone was spent, and very few remained in that place which durst ryde a course wyth Rosicleer, albeit the number of knightes were more then 3000. But last of all Bargandel and Lyriamandro willing to proue themselues vpon the newe knight with great courage, which the sight of their mistresses caused in them, rydde both against Rosicleer, and in theyr waye as they two straue who should be first, Bargandel giuing the spurres to his horse ran against Rosicleer, Bargandel in his race hit so strongly that his speare flewe in peeces, but Rosicleer knowing Bargandel, by a deuise that he had, & mindfull of his former courtesie, when he came nere him, raised vp y^e end of his speare, & rode by without 

touching of Bargandel. Bargandel not féeling his aduersary thought that he had missed his rest, and therefore taking an other speare for the reencounter, he rode again towardes Rosicleer, but Rosicleer did as he did before, whereby he cleerely perceiued the knightes entent to be for to spare him, and waxing madde angry he auoyded the place, presently stepped in the Prince Lyriamandro, to whom likewyse Rosicleer so behaued hymselfe as vnto Bargandel, albeit himselfe was well sturred with these shockes. Lyriamandro as madde as Bargandel to finde a friende without occasion, and not knowing his meaning rode after Bargandel, where both of them departed to diguise themselues thincking to beguyle the knight, if peraduenture he had had some knowledge of them. Not longe after the trumpettes blowed the retreate, and the iustes shoulde haue ended when these two knightes entered wyth yelowe plumes and guylded armour, their horse trappings al of yelowe, & parting company, the one of them ranne against Rosicleer, whom he mette so strongly that their speares flewe in péeces, neither of them béeing vnhorsed, whereat all the people were dismayde, for no knight that daye but was ouerthrowne of as many as Rosicleer had encountred. But these two knightes rode againe the seconde time, and as with more choller, so wyth fercer stomackes they met, that Rosicleer tourned with his horse more then iiij. paces backewardes, hauing much a doe to bring him forward, and the straunge knight lost his stirrops & fell to y^e ground, w^t his horse ouer him. His companion tooke his roome & ran twise against Rosicleer, neither of them loosing their seates, but at the third encountry he fell to the ground as his fellowe did, Rosicleer a little diseased in his saddle, recouered lyghtly. The yelowe knyghtes thus ouerthrowen mounted on theyr horses to retourne the way which they had come, sore displeasaunt at the little harme they had done vnto Rosicleer, but 

they beshrewed themselues for the further attempting of his acquaintaunce, and musinge who it should bée, they remembred themselues of the younge gentleman Rosicleer and of hys greate prowesse whereto themselues were priuy, thincking that perhaps it might be he, but yet bicause of his younge yeares they remoued this thought agayne, and coulde not well iudge who he was. Then the king commaunded euery Knyght to leaue off, at which the noyse ofthe instruments were hearde so loude that the whole place range of the sounde thereoff. Oliuia nowe mynded to discende with the other Ladyes, wherefore the knightes & other Princes flocked together to giue their attendaunce, amonge whome Rosicleer as forwarde as the best in good will, presented himselfe vnto his mistresse, which pleased hir not a little. Entering into the great court of the pallaice they there alyghted, where the king welcommed thē making seuerall tokens of courtesie to euery one, & comming to Rosicleer he desireed him to be at hys appoyntment for that night, for that he had greate desire to sée hym vnarmed, all the rest gladly obeyed, but Rosicleer with his beuere shutte, requested his maiestie of pardon for that it behoued him to disarme himselfe in his tente, till the wyse man had permitted the contrary, and so sayinge hée tooke hys leaue of the kinge, enteringe into his tent where hee found the wise Artemidoro, whiche with two pages abided hys comminge, when Rosicleer was within, they drew the curtaynes so close that Rosicleer was not séene of any, and then helped to vnarme him. After the tables were couered and the boorde was furnished of all delicacies whiche Artemidoro had thought on. The wise man himselfe beeing both Cooke & Cater. Rosicleer sitting downe gaue him harty thanckes for his good prouision, but in deede his stomacke was full with the Princesse Oliuia, which had so possessed his entrayles that the daintie dishes did not whyt delight his appetie.

During this time the Prince and the knightes whiche supped with the kinge highly extolled Rosicleers worthinesse, eache of them béeing desirous to knowe him, for they all iudged him to bee of highe parentage. Thus was this night bestowed till the daye came, wherein they were to expect freshe matter of discourse and tabletalke.¶ An aduenture which chaunced in king Oliuerios court. Cap. 33.THe next daye after, diuine seruice finished. The king inuited to breakfeast all the knightes, and that done tooke his place in that order as you haue heard before, looking that some straunge knight should iust with the new knight. Now when the place was peopled with both gentle and ungentle, & that the Princesse Oliuia was placed on hir scaffolde, in came Rosicleer, mounted vppon his courser, & vaunted himself as ioyously before his mistresse as if he had not feared the skirmish with .x. gyantes, but that which liked the Princesse best, was a conceit deuised in the pensell of his speare, beeing a burning torche, the waxe dropping from it, signifying thereby y^e misery of louers, with this posy vnderneth in Romaine letters. Extinguo & Extinguor. After Rosicleer was thus entred, many strong and valiant knights, such as had not iusted the daye before, desired to trye themselues vppon the newe knight, especially Albalaxes king of Mauritania, who vpō hope to be Lord of the rich tent, tooke a great speare, and with all his force ranne against Rosicleer, but Rosicleer was not taken so tardy in the receite but that hée mette the valiant Pagan with such strength, as horse and man tumbled to the ground. Rosicleer rode on somwhat troubled with this encountry, & ere he was wel set in his saddle, there ran against him an other Pagan Lord of Busia, but Roiscleer finely vnhorsed him, and in the same course

ouerthrew foure others that there was not a knight left to dare him, at this time he tarried sometime awaiting for newe commers in, but there was none. Onely at a corner of the listes, he sawe a huge Gyant in white armour vpon a great courser, wiht a hoarce and disdainful voice, commaunding the people to make him roome. And not farre from this gyant a gentlewoman vpon a palfray in straunge attire much different from ours, hir face was all bedewed with teares as if the gyant had vsed violēce towards hir. The gyant approaching to the place where the kinge stoode, made no reuerence, but the gentlewoman knéeled downe, saying. "Know most excellent Prince that the renowne of this court hath brought me from far countries hether, chiefly for one cause, which the wickednesse of this gyant hath nowe made two, the originall of them both you shall héere nowe vnder one. In the farther part of the East néere vnto the great Cataya, there gouerneth a Princesse named Iulia, as yet but young of yeares, but not younge for handsomnesse, béeing now as it were in the pride of all hir beautie. Hir father was a right cunning Magician enstructing hir so perfectly in his skill, as nowe therein there are fewe comparable. For since his death, she hir self diuined by hir knowledge that she shoulde be prisoner to two gyants, and shoulde be inlarged by one knight which should fight with them both. For the case should stand thus, that if hir knight were vanquished she should as perpetually captiuate be at their commaund, otherwise to be at libertie if they were yelden. Hir selfe foreseeing this, and not finding who he might be, hath prouided by hir knowledge not to bée beguilded. For by hir Arte she hath made this swoorde, which no knight may euer vnsheth, but onely he whiche must fight wyth the two gyants for hir libertie, and besides the swoorde is such as without it, it were a hard aduenture, but wyth it the knight maye boldely venture on his foes. The swoorde shée made and kepte

close till time these two Gyantes by night assailing hir, got the Lordshippe of hir person, after which time by a trustie seruaunt she caused this swoorde to be conuayed vnto me with thys commaunde to trauaile for hys sake in all Princes courtes, and to seeke out the knight which could and should maynteine hir quarell. Three yeares are passed since I vndertooke this enterprise, and within this thrée monthes landing in an Iland towardes the West, after a longe iourney to no purpose it was my fortune to méete this gyant Candramaite, there makinge him pertaker of my sute, hee requested to proue the aduenture, which I graunted, but when he could not draue it out beeinge couetous of the swoorde, he denyed it mee agayne, saying. For so much as you goe to the kynge of Englands courte, there to seeke some knyghte whiche wyll doe his deuoure in your mistresse behalfe. No man shall attempt the aduenture of the swoorde, but he shall first trye his forces vpon mee, and if by hym I be vanquished or slaine, let him take the swoord, otherwise I will withholde it from all men, with this he promised to beare me company, and I of two euils determined to choose the lesse. Albeit at this instant I am in greater extremitie, by reason of this Gyants wrong done to me, and my mistresse thraldome. This is the necessitie whiche draue me hether, and I am humbly to beseeche your maiestie, discretly to way my cause, and to giue remedy by your subiectes as you beste may." Candramarte all this time standinge by, in the ende auerred hir tale to be true, and farther intimated to the Knightes and Princes that seeing he coulde not drawe out the swoorde, there shoudl no man be master of it, but by the mastery of him: but sayth he, I will defende it against any knyght which shal demaund it. All the knights beheld the swoord with the rich hangers as the fairest which they had séene, but the kinge somewhat angry at the Gyants rudenesse towardes the gentlewoman, sayd to him in this manner.

"Candramarte thou hast done ill to take this swoorde from the gentlewoman, for as it seemes Iulia made it not for thee, & thy pride is ouer great to suppose that none in the worlde will demaunde it of thee.  The Gyant angerly lookinge vpon the king as though his eyen would haue flyen out of his visage, said to the king Demaund it then thy selfe Syr king, or set any of thy knightes to aske it, & I will then make aunswere vnto thee howe rashly thou hast taken vpon thee to correct me." These speaches were deliuered with so high a voyce by the Gyant, that all the knyghtes whiche were in the compasse hearde it, but no man spake a woorde, so that the kynges choller encreased both agaynst the Gyant and his owne subiectes. And I must beare with them, for the Gyant was great and tall, and as hardye as a Lyon, and no man liuinge very neere matchable for so good Fortune: but yet there was within the lystes both a hardier and more fortunate knight, euen the good Rosicleer, which euer hearing his vndiscrete talke vnto the kinge, comminge neere vnto the Gyant, tooke him vp on this sorte. "Candramarte, content thy selfe, and learne to knowe vnto whom thou speakest, for I tell thee that kinge Oliuerio hath suche knyghtes in his court as can make thee amende thy rusticitie, though thou went more vntaught then thou art, and for that thou shalt not mistrust mee, beholde I am the last and the least of them yet as one whiche desires to serue hym with the moste. In hys name, and in behalfe of the gentlewoman, I charge thée surrender the swoorde vnto the gentlewoman, or if thou wilt not that, do thou take that parte of the field which shall best lyke thee, for in thys quarrell I wyll eyther kyll or bee kylled. Wyth a terrible contenaunce Candramarte stared vppon Rosicleer, as who shoulde saye, darest thou speake so boldely," and perceiuinge hym to bee but a younge Knyght, whyche hee noted by hys white armour, in great scorne he aunswered thus. I see well

foolish knight thou hast not ben long acquainted with the burthen of armour, for if thou wert in thy kinde and had well wayed the successe of Combatons thou wouldest shake euery ioynt of thée to beholde mée. But thy ignoraunce makes thée leape beyond thy lashe, and thrusteth thée forward to thine owne decay. But séeing thou hast made choyse thy selfe of thy deathsman, let vs go to the battaile, for I woulde not but that thou shouldest repent thée of thy foolishnesse. So Candramarte broched his horse with the spurres, and Rosicleer did the lyke, whiche appeased the kinges displeasure, that he knewe not how to recōpence his forwardnesse in doing him pleasure, albeit it may be if he loued Rosicleer, y^t he somwhat mistrusted the euent bicause the gyant was byg and Rosicleer vnexercised in armes, and that which was chiefest without a swoorde, but for remedy thereto, he caused a swoorde of his owne to be fetched, wherewith he charged a knight to deliuer it to Rosicleer, with his commaundemēt. That séeing in his name he hath so well fitted Candromarte for his aunswere, and for that cause was to take the battayle vpon him, nowe hee prayed him to weare thys swoorde lykewyse for his sake, whiche he would warrant to be good. The knight dyd his message accordingly, but Rosicleer making his excuse gentely, retourned y^e swoord with this aunswere, "I humbly thancke the kinges maiestie for so high a present, the not receiuinge whereoff commeth not of any refusal but by a promise which I haue made, as his maiestie can testifie, neuer to weare sword, but if I winne it, & therfore I craue pardon at his maiesties handes for his discourtesie, otherwyse I were greatly to blame if I thought not my selfe honoured by beeing girte in a kinges weapon." The messenger deliuered Rosicleers aunswere in the same woordes as Rosicleer had giuen it out so the kinge somewhat lamenting the knightes wilfulnesse, as he thought, weaponlesse to wage battayle with so abled a warriour, mused vppon

this and for the rest commended him to God. All the standers by were sory to sée the new knight so couragious as to fight with a Gyant without a weapon, and especially the beautifull Princesse Oliuia coulde not but bee an angred at the new knights ieoperdous aduenture, as if she had had no small title or clayme to his person.¶ A daungerous battayle betweene Candramarte and Rosicleer. Gap. 34.AS they prepared themselues to the caryer, y^e people gathered together to see this dangerous fight between the new knight and the Gyant Candramarte, and they as glad to sée the issue vpon their lyght coursers with their speares in their restes so vyolently hurled agaynste the other that the grounde yelded vnder their féete, the force of their stronge armes ioyned with the fury of their horse in such wise that the Gyant made small shiuers of his greate speare and constrayned Rosicleer to take his pillowe on his horsebacke, but the newe knighte gaue the Gyant so mightie a blowe that he made his stirops fall from him, and quickely closinge wiht the Gyant, he drewe him by force from the saddell, and threw him to the grounde so that he somewhat brused the Gyants shoulderbone, and presently would haue tourned agayne vppon Candramarte to haue made a dispatch of all, but that the Gyant being of greate courage, and enforcing himselfe to endure the remnaunt, gotte on his legs, and addressing his shielde before him, with his Fawlchon in his hande awayted Rosicleer, for so soone as Candramarte was downe, Rosicleer then alyghted and sent his horse to his tente, Rosicleer now being on foote made towardes Candramarte. Candramarte first assayled Rosicleer with these wordes. What knight thinkest thou to fight with me without a sworde? What if thou haddest a better then this which I weare of the Quéene

"Iulias makinge, were all the Gods able thereby to warrant thée out of my handes? No: and thou shalt déerely repaye me the paine which thou hast put me to in this fall. Rosicleer comming neerer aunswered. Candramarte spare not to do thy vttermost, but cease thy reuilings, for God which gaue me might to ouerthrowe thee, wyll also giue me power and strength without other weapon to subdue thee, and although I bring no swoorde with mee, yet I hope in the liuinge God that thine shal protect me, and serue my tourne." Then the Gyant was in suche a rage that the fury of his choller with the bluffering of his breath issued through the sightes of his equimas in lyke sort as the smoke issueth out of a furnace. And his seconde assault was with his Fawlchon with both his hands fetched compaswise against Rosicleer, which seing the blow comming with such force, forward lyft vp his shield therin to receiue y^e stroke, but y^e blow was so mightie, y^t it hewed the shield asunder, & desending vpon the headpéece, made Rosicleer abate his lookes and bowe his knées, for sauegarde to his fall. The Gyant doubled vpon him, but Rosicleer neuer yet daunted, and recouering his courage almost agaynst the hare stepte aside that the Gyants blowe was all in vayne, and being somewhat out of charitie with the first, he determined no more to receiue any suche counterbuffes, so that an halfe houre after the combat had lasted the Gyant myght neuer hyt him one blowe for all that he coulde doe. For Rosicleer was so diliuer and quicke that he lightly auoyded them. Candramarte seing that Rosicleer would not abide by it, chased him vp and downe, and Rosicleer led the Gyant a course lykewise: but so, that the king and all the lookers on iudged that if the battayle shoulde endure long, that the newe knight might neuer escape the death. Rosicleer assayed many times to couple with the Gyant, and to pul the Fawlchon out of his hands, but Candramarte was so wily and so well aduised of the wordes which Rosicleer
spake in the beginning of their battayle, that he either kepte himselfe aloofe off, or in his pursute bare the poynt of his Fawlchon before him: but by this meanes the battayle continued to the no little discontentment of Rosicleer. For although his armoure was such that no wepon might wounde him on his body, yet was he sore brused with trauayle, and his bones were in a manner softened with the wearynesse he had felte for the lengthe of thy battayle. As the one gaue lyghtly so the other pursued as eagerlye, but as I saye neuer fastening a ryghte downe blowe, but as he might ouerthwart and endelong slipping his blowes, and in his pride boasting out these and such lyke speaches."O knight howe costlye shall the challenge of Quéene Iulias sworde be vnto thee, if for it thou must exchaunge thy lyfe? Haddest thou not ben better neuer to haue bene at this marte. But now know what valour Candramarte is off, for not all the worlde are of that credite with mee as to bayle thée out of my handes." For the fitting of hys action wherevnto he woulde shake hys heauy Fawlchon so gallantly, and roare so terribly: that euery man tooke Candramarte, rather for a Tyrant in the Tragedie, then a Jester in a Commedie. And Rosicleer friendes with their pitifull lookes bemoned the poore Rosicleer, as if he had already tasted of most cruell and bitter deathe in his gréene youthAmongst them, the fayre and beautifull Princesse Oliuia although as yet altogether vnacquaynted with Rosicleer, was a spectatour, neither carelesse nor curicus, but as one without hope. She onely wished well to Rosicleer, whose bruses were as deepe set in his sides, as they were imprinted in Rosicleers fleshe, and euery wagging of the most huge and monstrious Candramartes weapon, strake a salte teare from hir faire eyes, so was she estranged from hir self & altogether become an other mans: the newe knight eying his mistresse became so desperate that 

he fully resolued either to close with Candramarte and wring his weapon from him, or to dye vpon him. And watching the opportunitie, when the fawchon was ouer the Gyants head, bending his body stept within the Gyant, y^t the Gyant had no other resistance but to fel him to the grounde with his elbowes. This was no great misfortune to Rosicleer, for albeit he was fayne to bowe his knées by the thrust of the Gyants elbowes, yet couching his bodye closely, his chaunce was so good as to fasten vpon the hilts of Quéene Iulias sworde, which hee drewe out, the scaberde remayning at the Gyants side. Rosicleer nowe being seased of the sword stepte from Candramarte and called vppon him on this wise. "Candramarte nowe thou shalte see who shall haue the worste bargayne of Quéene Iulias sworde, sith on euen hands we shall try this combat," and with this remembring the Gyants former pride, he layed at the Gyant so thick and so sure that in short space the blood ranne from the Gyante in more then tenne places, for the sworde was excéeding sharpe, and Rosicleer as fell and venemous. Nowe maye you thincke that the mayden seeing the sworde bared by the knight, was the gladdest woman in the earth, and that the king with other Princes and knights thancked God hartely, for prouiding Rosicleer of a weapon the sooner to put ende to the battayle. But the Gyant assaulted so sore by Rosicleer and wounded so daungerously, began wholy to mistrust the prophecie of the sworde, and to dispayre of the victory, and as in such cases wanhoope is aduenturous: so his armour being rente, the habergeenvnmayled, and all the riuetting out of order, for that cause the Gyant woulde needes put the tryall of the challenge vpon one blowe. When this blowe was reached as farre as the Gyant might, to haue descended with more vyolence vppon Rosicleers headpéece, Rosicleer beinge more quicke then hee, mette the blowe crossewayes that he cut off both the Gyants armes harde by the elbowes. The

Gyant thus maymed, yelling out a lothesome cry, reuyled & railed on Rosicleer, as a man distraught, & y^t which most encreased his payn, was not y^e tormēt of his disfigured armes: but either the shame of the victory, or the enuy at Rosicleer, but Rosicleer making little account of him, tooke the scabberde from his side, and so lefte him. Candramarte still followed blaspheming and cursing both God and men, and when he coulde neither be his owne executioner, nor procure an other to take the paynes, sware, that for sparing his death, he would deuise all the mischiefe that might against Rosicleer and that he woulde practise his death also, if possibly he could inuēt y^e meanes. But truly, if I had bene in Rosicleer case, I should not haue bene so straunge: seing, that bothe it shoulde haue bene the Gyants last request and so little encombraunce towardes me. But the king, Princes and knights, were so ioyous of the victory agaynst the Gyant, as they bare countenaunce of more ioy outwardly, then they had earst receyued, euery one openly desiring to sée him vnarmed: but chiefly Bargandel and Liriamandro, bring in some ielousie of y^e knight, whom they had found a friend ere they looked for, supposing that peraduenture he was Rosicleer, of whom the soddayne aduenture in the Sea had berefte them. And Quéene Iulias gentlewoman seing the combat tryed and the aduenture of the sworde achieued, concluding therby that this was he for whom she had made so long a iourney, saluted him courteously with this ambassade. "Now that it is euident noble knight, that you are the person, for whose helpe this sworde was framed by my mistresse, I am to certefie that my Lady greeteth you by me, & giueth you warninge that for hir sake you must maintain y^e fight wiht two braue Gyants, iointly cōbattant against you only. For this she hath sent you this sworde y^e commēdacion wherof, albeit not vnknown, lyeth in the continuall proofe which shee requesteth you neuer to forsake, for it wil much furder you in your enterprises.

Whereto I bessech you giue credite & deale effectually as she hath hope in you. But now giue me the sword that I may beare it to the king and the other Princes, that they may iustifie the truth of my former auoueh." So Rosicleer delyuered the sworde into hir handes with the sheath, which the gentlewoman brought before the king and the knights then present, which all attempted the pulling out but coulde not doe it, as if the scabberde had bene a peece of the same mettall whereof the sworde was, and not seuered by edge or toole, which made them all confesse, that to the new knight it was proposed, and to hym appertayned the fight with the two Gyants for the franchising of the Quéene Iulia.The king redelyuered the sworde into the gentlewomans handes, and bad hir yeelde it againe to Rosicleer, which she did, & taking hir leaue of him receiued this for answer. That he recōmēded himselfe vnto hir good grace, hartely thanking hir for so great care ouer him, as to prouide a sworde, whereof he had néede as hir selfe can witnesse, and for the rest hee promised not to fayle hir as hee was true knight to God and the worlde. The gentlewoman with this recommaunde gallopped awaye as fast as hir palfray mighte carry hir, the whilest Candramartes knights remoued their Lorde out of that place into hys tent, whence afterwarde with greate griefe for his sore mayme they conuayed him into his Ilande, wherein hauing settled himselfe as mindfull of his othe, he neuer left from immagening of crafty meanes, and coyning newe pollicies to bring Rosicleer to the death.When Candramarte was carryed into his tent, Rosicleer mounting vpon his horse, tooke a great speare in his hande and stode at the lystes ende, thincking that some knight would come against him, but they were all so scholed with the sight of this last victorye that neuer a knight shewed himselfe. Wherefore the king commaunded to sounde the trumpet to procéede vnto the disposing of the

rewardes for their trauayle. An Heralde demaunding aloude who had done best, they all referred the prices to Rosicleer. The king woulde not contende with them, but sayth heée, I will that my daughter haue the bestowing of them where shée best lyketh as touching this tournaye.She with much shamefastenesse which hir coloured cheekes bewrayed, accepted the charge, and taking the crowne with the choller in hir hande, she caused the new knighte to be called before hir, who burning in loue towardes hir, no lesse then shee was seruent in lyking towards him, dismounted at the first call, and betweene the two Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro mounted vp the scaffolde where the beautifull Princesse was, before whom he appeared with greater feare arising of his conceit concerning his indignitie, then earst attached him in the fight with Candramarte without a weapon.The two Princes comming before Oliuia, made their humble obeysaunce, and Rosicleer knéeled downe. The Princesse with a good grace bending to euery one of them spake to Rosicleer. "You knowe new knight what charge the king my father hath layde vppon mée, athough farre more honourable then I am able to sustayne, yet by mee assumed, neither to resist his will nor yet agaynst my desire, for it is cōmendable of it selfe to be a commender of vertue, & neuer to much may I commend it. The charge is, that wyth mine owne handes I shoulde distribute these prices accordinge as my own fancie leadeth mee to deeme of euery mans trauayle and valyauncye. The delyuerye of these Jewelles, were nothing harde nor doubtefull, but the disposing is more then harde, bicause it pertayneth to iudgement in deedes of armes, where vnto my sexe is not sufficiently abled. Neuerthelesse sir knight as you paynes haue bene greatest, therto witnesseth this whole multitude: so you prowesse in my iudgement, so much assureth on your parte, that without doinge wronge

to any of these Princes and knights, I may with good reason confer them vpon you. For this, if I knowe to do right vnto whome I ought, it is meete that you doe away your helmette, and sith youre deedes discouer who you are, it is no reason y^t you couer your selfe any longer." When the Princesse had thus sayd, Rosicleer not hauing power to excuse himselfe, vnlaced his helmette which being put off, his face seemed so beautifull by the heate and trauayle of the armour, which raysed a fresh redde in hys cheekes, that is stroke them all in a maze, and none of those which saw him, considering his fayrenesse with his age, but rather iudging him an Angel of heauen, then a mortall knight.When the Princesse Oliuia sawe him so fayre, as already loue had made a wracke in the most secret part of hir hearte by the viewe of his knighthoode, so nowe the same breache being made wyder by the seconde assulte in his beautifull lookes, loue entred with banner displayed and finding no resistaunce, tooke possession wholly of hir hearte, and swore all that he founde to be his true prysoners. Thus lost she hir libertie, and yet with the beste courage that a woman mighte, shee framed out a countenaunne of great freedome in this manner. "You needed not by your fauoure sir knight to haue bene ashamed of your face, and yet such as it is, it is farre inferiour to your manhoode, but this is beyond the cōpasse of my commission, now come you neere and receiue at my handes the glory of your worthinesse, which your good Fortune yeldeth you." Rosicleer approching very neere kneeled down and the Princese put the choller about his necke, and the crowne vpon his heade. When the Princesse had so done with a little staye betweene, Rosicleer tooke the crone from his owne heade, and as he was on his knees sayde vnto the Princesse. "Most excellent Princesse for the souereigne grace you haue shewed me, I will remayne yours hencefoorth to serue you loyally, as poore recompence

for so rich a benefit. And as I doe receiue this choller as the price of knighthoode in your opinion, so I beséeche you to take of me this crowne as a testimonie of your surpassing beautie in my eye." With this he set y^e rich crowne vpon the golden haires of the Princesse Oliuia, she béeing glad of this gift, although somewhat blushing at the wordes, he spake. The two Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro standing by and knowinge him to be Rosicleer whom they had lost in the maine sea, when the cerimonies were finished, went to him, embracing him as a goodly as if he had bene their owne brother yet courteously challenging him for his vnkindenesse in not making him selfe knowen vnto them. The king Oliuerio abashed at so grat bountie in a knight of so young yeares began to thincke more aduisedly of that which the wise Artemidoro had sayde, from that time he estéemed more highly of the newe knight, as you shall heare after this. But now the noise was so great which the vyals made & other instruments that one might not heare an other speake, at which time the faire Princesse Oliuia with the riche crowne vpon hir head, and in hir company y^e knight Rosicleer with the two Princes descended form the scaffold, and in great pompe went to the kings pallaice, the Princesse leauing them ther to take hir own lodging, & they al entring the chamber of presence where the king staied for thē, & after a generall welcome by name taking Rosicleer aside, he said vnto him. "Sir knight hether you are very welcome, for I haue had great desire to knowe you, & I would to god by your stay I might as wel be acquainted with you, for by you the honour of my court hath ben well vpholden. Mightie king aunswered Rosicleer, I am rather to be borne withall if I desire to be your seruaunt, sith for the same cause and for to sée your court I am come hether. The king kissed the knight vpon the chéeke as tenderly as if he had bene his owne sonne, saying. Rosicleer, I account more of these wordes then of y^e worth of"

my best citie, and aduise thée well of these speaches, for I am to demaund them of thée if thou wilt not otherwyse performe thy promise. So Rosicleer was retained for the kings knight, and all the olde courtiers both Princes and knightes of great name ranne to embrace Rosicleer with great pleasure vnto thē to haue his company, except onely Don Siluerio Prince of Lusitania, whō a ielous thought vexed as towardes Rosicleer for that hee had vnhorsed hym in the presence of his Lady. But after this order Rosicleer remained in the English court, where he rested himselfe till this sodeine aduenture called him foorth as shall be tolde you.¶ A gentlewoman came to the court from the Princesse Briana, which made him follow Brandagedeon. Cap. 35.THe storie recounteth that Rosicleer abode many dayes in king Oliuerios court, well liked and loued of both king and nobles. In which time Rosicleer gaue the king the rich tent which the wise Aremidoro had wrought for him, wherein the king tooke great delight. For although he had many other, both curious for making and costly for matter yet had he not séene in his life any either so rich or of so cunning workmanship, so that the kings good will towardes Rosicleer encreased by Rosicleers presence, and in that also for his company many other great Princes and straunge knights remained with y^e king so long time after y^t these iusts were ended, which beginning of friendship betwixt Rosicleer and some of these knightes grewe in the ende to such perfection by his gratious and familiar behauiour, that neither fauour of friendes nor dreade of daunger might wyth theyr willes sunder them from this amitie. And if Rosicleer had such power ouer knightes straungers, what had he ouer the Princesse Oliuia being surprised with his loue, &

hauing engrauen his Image so depely in hir immagination, y^t he neuer departed from hir thought, but euermore there renewed in hir remembraunce his knightly déedes and great valour, whereby she made an euident demonstration of his linage as if naught els had bene enimy to hir purpose. But this faire Princesse now so languished with y^e tormēt of this amorous thought & pleasant liking of hir loue Rosicleer, that nowe the conuersation of hir gentlewomen was yerksome and to be solitarie did most content hir, forbearing withal, both hir rest in sléepe, & hir sustenaunce in féeding. In which melancholy she was so far gone without the feeling of hir owne disease, as y^t nothing might ease hir highnesse but Rosicleers presence, which bred hir greater bale in his absēce, by y^e griefe galling hir most to thinck that seing he was a straunger in y^e land, he would ere long retourne to his own countrey. One day casting hir selfe vpon hir bed, and tossing suche like things in hir fancie, she sent out many a sorrowfull sigh as y^e forerūners of this which followeth. "O loue, loue how wel it eased me before times to heare louers mourn, to read their straunge fits, to see figured before me y^e variable successe of their attempts, with the feareful frights of thy subiectes and captiues. O how well at ease was I when being farre from the fire & out of daunger, I might laugh & loke on, & warme me by their flame. But now not so frée nor clean deuoid of thought, I rue the little pitie I toke vpon their paine, & am therfore scorched not without desert. O loue, loue, by whom, not the feblest onely, but the sturdiest also & stoutest are vnable to quench this fire, if it please thee to kindle it. Alas do not y^e wisemen seme fooles, & y^e hardy cowards if it be thy pleasure: & dare any man cōfesse y^e truth in this his passiō, & are not al like sicke men beguiled, call sowre swéete, payne pleasure, bale blisse, griefe gladnesse, & the losing of their late libertie y^e enlarging of their new franchise to contēt their fancies. And thou vnfortunite Oliuia art thou Princesse of great
Britaine the daughter of king Oliuerio, the woman sued vnto by so pliant peticioners both Princes and knightes of great courage, whom thou hast all refused. No assuredly, but thou art some base and meane gentlewoman if the sight of one onely knight not knowen vnto thée hath so dimmed thy vnderstandinge, that reason is become no more defensible. Where is thy late pride Oliuia, where is thy auncient pleasure, where are thy hautye lookes, where lyes the charter of thy libertie, where is the estimation of thy beautie, where is the excellencie of thy estate. O the miserable and euerchaungebale state of man, lyke vnto the hearbes or flowers whiche the morninges dewe refresheth, the noones heate opresseth, and the night shade encloseth in, as the graue doth our bodyes: beeinge a liuely morrall of our mortalitie. Alas Rosicleer, my father thinckes he hath made a great purchase by thy being here, but I would to God I might be as sure heire to this purchase, as I am otherwise certeyne to repent thy comminge hether. And yet whatsomeuer the euent be, my loue commaundes in me the contrary. For is it not better for me to see Rosicleer, and to acknowldge the goodnesse of God towardes man, in inhablinge of him to the achieuement of suche wonders, whereby and by the enioying of his sight I receiue suche pleasure, then neuer to haue seene him though I lose the hope of augmenting my state. And truely befall what maye in spight of Fortunes rancour, I wyll staie my selfe vppon this choise, and wyll not exchaunge it," Verie wyse was the Princesse Oliuia, and as the tymes affoorded very well learned, but yet these speaches proceded rather of hir passion, then of aduised reason or good readinge. And the lyke combatte to this of contrary thoughtes Rosicleer endured, entertaining in his hearte the counterfaict of the princesse in y^e secret contemplation whereoff he was diligently occupied, immagining theroff the brauorie of hir beautie, and the great desert in hir to

be best beloued. But as againe to the Princesse in all this subiection to loue & his lawes, hir honesty is chiefly to be noted, which for all that both y^e remedy was aboue hir capacitie, & the paine likely to ouercome hir paciēce: yet bare out the bruntes thereof in such modestie rather by sufferaunce then striuing withall, that neither coulde Rosicleer euer assure himselfe of hir liking, nor any of hir seruaunts wring it out by the maner of hir desease. Rosicleer was as close, which in him was the occasion of farther trouble, for coueting to be alone the better to reioyce himselfe, and to enter more narowly into the serch of his owne habilitie with the likelihood of his sute, hee stumbled as in a blinde way vpon two blockes so placed as that if he auoided the one, he must néedes hit his shin against the other: For this was one. If he reuealed not his griefe or not made hir priuie to his estate, there was naught to preferre him before an other knight. Againe y^e other was, if he laid open his race, his supplicatiō would lacke succour. Nowe howe could hee with candlelight, not hazard a fall vpon the one or the other. For he was perswaded y^e prince Edward, brother to the princesse Oliuia was his father, wherefore the néere kinred was to be concealed if he looked for helpe, and yet the concealment was the onely debarring of his hope. In this conflict he did nothing but afflict himselfe, neither daring to discouer his malady, nor minded to dissemble it altogehter, by so much the more in worse case then y^e Princesse was, as the infirmitie of hir sexe did lessen hir paine by yelding at the first, and the magnanimitie of his courage to haue the mastery, did in the end make the déeper impression in his flesh, like as in nature the hardest fight is betwéene the hardiest, & sooner shall the cannon shot deface y^e high towers, then breake through a rampier of wooll or flaxe, and so the issue proued in him. But béeing one daye with the king and the other noble Princes in y^e great pallaice to beguile his solēne conceits which ouercame his nights

rest, he sawe entering a gentlewoman well apparelled, which when she came néere boowing humbly to the king, sayd as followeth. "God preserue your maiestie most noble king of the great Britaine. The Princesse Briana my mistresse and wife vnto the Prince Edward your sonne, with the remēbraunce of hir duetie, craueth to be certifyed by your good grace what you haue heard of hir Lord and husband, for she neuer saw him since his first arriual into Hungary. My Lady also by me gréeteth y^e Princesse Oliuiayou daughter, vnto whom she commaunded me to deliuer a cofer of iewels, but cōming to land on y^e Enlish coast, I was set vpon by a great gyant, named Brandagedeon as I heare, who taking the cofer from me bad me come to this court, here to tel a new knight which once vnhorsed him, y^t he would make aunswere to none but to him as concerning the coffer, and that for him he would stay at y^e shore, there to make satisfaction according as he was charged. I beséech your good highnes therfore to send that newe knight in your daughters quarrel against this Gyant." Rosicleerhauing knowne this gentlewoman amongst those which attended vpon the Princesse Briana his mother in the monastery of the riuer, & that shée had to name Arinda was glad to haue y^e oportunitie offred to serue the Princesses Oliuia and Briana, and therefore rysing from where he sat he came before the king, to whō he sayd. "Sir séeing it is Rosicleer whom this gentlewoman séeketh, and that Brandagedeon hath sent for mée, I beseech your maiestie to giue me licence to goe in these affaires, for it is out of reason to forslacke such worthy seruice to two so noble Princes." The king loth of any occasion at all ministred wherby he should forsake the court for feare least his retourne would not be ouer hastie, for he knewe well that he was nothing addict to idlenesse, yet seeing his importunitie both to aunswere the challenge and to employe his trauaile, in the name of these two princes would not gainesay his pur-

pose, but wished him not to goe alone for that the gyant was wel manned with aboue xxx. knights, for this cause Bargandel & Lyriamandro, & other princes & knights offered to go in his company, but they could not preuaile, for he excused himselfe with this, y^t it should redound to his disworship, if he should take more company then the Gyant looked for. And by and by he craued pardon to depart to his chamber ther to arme himself. The gentlewoman Arinda well knowing him, but for that time suppressing it, while Rosicleer bucled on his armour, went to deliuer hir message vnto the Princesse Oliuia, vnto whome shee tolde that the cofer with iewels was intercepted by a false barratour a Gyant named Brandagedeon, and that y^e new knight had taken vpon him to fetch them againe, whiche when the Princesse heard, although she was glad to vnderstand ought from the princesse Briana, yet was she sorrowful when she heard that Rosicleer would leaue y^e citie, and would go alone thether where the Gyant abode him, for hir minde gaue hir y^t she should not sée Rosicleer in hast, but tourning from this she demaunded of y^e gentlewoman many things in particuler touching hir Lady, so that the gentlewoman stayed with hir till Rosicleer being armed called vpon hir. Then the princesse sayth, if ther be no other remedy you may go with him, albeit tell the knight frō me, that I had rather the iewels were left, then he should put himself in so great a ieopardy. Arinda sayd she would doe hir commaund, and went downe to Rosicleer being already on horseback with his esquire Telyo, she likewise tooke hir palfray, and they three rode through the Citie of London, muche gased after by the king and all the knights and Ladyes which stoode in the windowes and battlementes of the pallaice, and wyth great sorrowe pittied him to see him goe alone, perswading themselues that if Brandagedeon were slaine or in daunger, that his men would rescewe him.¶ A cruell battaile betweene Rosicleer and Brandagedeon with his knightes. Cap. 36ROsicleer béeing thus acompanied with Arinda and Telyo his squier, willed the gentlewoman to guyde him on the waye to the place where Brandagedon was. Arinda knowing him well inough, sayde. "Noble Rosicleer, I dare not so doe. The Gyant is fierce and strong and hath with him many knightes, which if hée haue neede shall helpe him, and then shall I see you in perill of your life. Better were it Rosicleer that you should leaue this enterprise and take the waye towardes Hungary, there to comfort the sorrowfull Princesse Briana, which since your departure from the monastery hath neuer ben mery. Rosicleer perceiuing well that the gentlewoman knewe him, casting his armes about hir necke, sayd vnto hir. Why how nowe Arinda, how is it that you know me and I haue not knowen my selfe since my comming into this lande? But tell me gentle sister howe the Princesse Briana doth, my good Lady, for whose sorrowe I am much agreeued, albeit to remedy it, there were no reason in forsaking this enterprise which I haue taken in hand to doe hir seruice therein. Besides that, I am determined not to retourne into Hungary before I can heare some newes of the Prince Edward, whether he be deade or aliue. No sayth the gentlewoman, but let his matter alone, for it were lesse losse that the two Princesses shoulde want the cofer of iewels then that you shoulde hazard your life in winning of it, and more acceptable seruice shall you doe my Lady in going to visite hir, then in seekinge out the Gyant to fight with him." The gentlewoman with all tooke holde of the brydle raynes to haue ledde Rosicleers horse out of the way, whereat Rosicleer laughing a good, aunswered hir thus. "Arinda, I should get a good report in the court of kinge Oliuerio if for fears of a battaile with this Gyant I should tourne

aside from this iourney which for the same cause I haue vndertaken. If I were certeine of more then a thousand deathes I would not followe thy aduise herein Arinda," and so spurryng his horse he kepte on his way. The gentlewoman woulde not importune him farther, but ledde him towardes the Gyant, where not farre off, they mette an other gentlewoman on foote weping verye piteously. At hir Rosicleer demaunded the cause of hir griefe, which she vttered strayghtwaies in these wordes. "O sir knight, Fortune, Fortune hath frowned on me, so that better welcome should be the deathe then the dayelyght. Rosicleer yet requested hir to speake more playnly, and to tell wherein Fortune had wrought hir suche dispite. I will gladly sayth she & for truth sir knight I am a gentlewoman belonging to the Quéene of Lusitania, which sent me with a brother of mine a verye valyaunte knight, hether to bring certeine Jewelles for the Princesse Oliuia daughter to the king Oliuerio, and for the Princesse Rodasylua hir owne daughter. Now our mishappe was such that entring the shore, wee hitte vpon a great and diuelish Gyant, who examining vs whether we went and what we carried in our fardle, bicause my brother made no aunswere slewe him, and putting me from my palfray tooke from me my horse with the fardell, ouer and besides with this commaund to go vnto the king Oliuerio and to the knights of his courte there to recorde my complaint against him. Thus haue I my Lord satisfied your request, now God be with you, for I will on to craue some remedye".With this the gentlewoman parted from them, but Rosicleer calling to hir sayde. "Gentlewoman, so it is that my arrant is for y^e same purpose to fight with the Gyant, for the lyke trespasse by him committed agaynst this gentlewomā here with me. If you wil retourne with vs, wee shalbe very glad therof, and by Gods helpe I shall well quell that Gyants insolency. What sayde the

gentlewoman doe you purpose alone to fighte with the Gyant. I in deede auswered Rosicleer and haue hope to reuenge this gentlewoman and your brother. God maye well giue you power so to do if it please him sayd the gentlewoman, but in respect of the Gyants strength it wyll not sinke into my brest that a C. such knights as you are can chastise him. Well sayd Rosicleer if you will go with me you may at leasure when you see the euent deliberate what to doe. If ye will not fare you well, for lesse shalbe your hope of remedie in keeping your way as you nowe doe." Rosicleer helde on, and the gentlewoman viewing his goodly personage, thereby perswading hir selfe that it were but little losse to tourne backe with him, determined to proue his good Fortune. And as she was not fully assured in hir thought, shee spake on this wyse. "Be not displeased with me but for the loue of God fayre knyghte haue some greater regard of your owne safetie, not to cast your selfe away for the recouery of my dāmage, it is no great matter for me to take some paynes in goyng with you: but it wilbe some griefe to retourne agayne laden wiht a fresh complaynt of a new murder. And therefore for Gods sake let the Gyant alone. Rosicleer sayd, I may not, but seing you haue promised your company, gette vp behinde my squire, and cast your care vpon God, which will puruaye for your ease, as best shall lyke him." So they foure trauayled towardes the place where the Gyants abiding was, and comming néere vnto the shore they sawe him harde by the water where he sate vpon a great horse, and more then thirtie knights in a crayer not farre off, as if they purposed to boord a tall ship, which was on floate in the Sea halfe a mile. Brandagedeon by and by knew Rosicleer to be the new knight by the rich armour he bare, the selfesame being worn by him in the iusts, wherein he was hurled to grounde for which cuase preuenting Rosicleers salutacion, with a loud and hollow voice he cried vnto him. Now Sir knight may I magnifie

"my gods for that I haue thée in such a place wher I may be auenged of thée at my pleasure for the despite thou hast done me, and all the world shall not raunsome thée from my hands. God of heauen shalbe my borrow aunswered Rosicleer, which also shall correct thy wickednesse & tread vnder foote thy intollerable pride and arrogancie. But to tell thee my message, I challenge thée for to make satisfactiō vnto these gentlewomē of y^e wrong thou hast done them, or to prepare thy selfe to mainteyne thy mischeife." Brandagedeon spake no word, but signified his meaning by his demeanour, for he tourned his horse head in great rage and tooke a heauy speare with him, the other vnderstanding his signe, did as much. This first iourney brake their staues & made them try the rest of the battayle on foote. The Gyant being clean vnhorsed & Rosicleer horse giuing backe, so y^t he rusht agaynst y^e ground, but y^e succes was diuers & unequal in y^e riders themselues. For Rosicleer kéeping his saddel felte no harme in his body, & the Gyant thrown vyolently to the earth, was well shaken with the fall.But the combate is not yet ended, for Brandagedeon being strong and mightie helde Rosicleer very harde, as in éeed it could not be otherwise, for betwixt them alone the fight continued two houres, all y^e meane time neither part giuing ouer, nor making nay semblaunce of discomfiture. In thende the knight hauing treble aduauntage ouer y^e Gyant, first in Queene Iulias sword which hyt sore: secondly in Artemidoros harnes which held out the force of the Gyants weapon: and thirdely the nimblenesse of his bodye ready both to assaile strongly and to decline as lightly from the others blowe, by whiche means hauing made a wide hole in the Gyants armour hee wounded the Gyant at his pleasure.The execution of this challenge to so little displeasure on Rosicleers part, made Arinda thincke it long till shee shoulde blase it at home in the monasterye of the ryuer:

but hir pleasure was soone ouercast, for their was ministered vnto hir a cup of colde water in stéede of better lyking to alay hir thirst. Al this happening beyond hir expectation, by y^e Gyants knights, which seing their maister at such an exigent although in no euident apparance of his ende, in great fury came to lande, and at once all of them with their swordes fell vpon Rosicleer. This was no euen match, thirtie knights and a Gyant to set vpon one silly knight, before almost tyred with two houres battaile against y^e Gyant. But what thing may resist Gods ordinaunce? The Gyants knights layd on with such courages, that it reuiued the Gyant, for they were all chosen knights, but I doubte not but that Rosicleer besturred himselfe, for so many as he mette, hee either maymed, wounded, slewe, or threwe to grounde. And being ouerawed by number and fresh onsettes, he was fayne for defence to his backe, to withdrawe himselfe into the Sea, there to stand in the water and receiue their blowes before himNowe Telyo his squyre and Arinda the Hungarian seing him forced to this extremitie were very wo begon, but the gentlewoman Lusitanian as desperate of all succours by his meanes, gallopped from thence vpon hir palfray which stode by the shore, no lesse complayninge the daunger wherein she lefte this good knight, then recurelesse lamenting the vniust death of hir brother. As she had ridde some parte of hir way towardes Oliuerios courte, there were two knights in hir iudgement very lusty and armed at all poynts which made all the hast they mighte to gette néere hir.This gentlewoman comming within the hearing of them, and minding to preuent other questions, cryed vnto them a farre off. "For the passyon of God my good Lords if all noblenes and vertue be not cleane buried in you, make hast to succour a knighte the best in the world, which is now enuironned with his enemyes being about"

thirtie knights besides a Gyant. The two knights with these newes posted a mayne, and by the same way which y^e gentlewomā came, in short time got a sight of Rosicleer, which at y^e time stode in y^e water against xi. or xii. of thē: for so many were left on liue of thirtie persons, those also which then lyued being well nurtured by Rosicleers discipline, that they woulde prease vppon him without good warrantise.Now by that time that the two knights came, Rosicleer had killed more then twentie, leauing a passage so well trode as they might easely trace out his footesteppes. At their first breaking in among the Gyants knights they burst their staues vppon two of thē ouerthrowing them, and then drawing their swordes strake so lustely that the assaylants were glad to leaue Rosicleer, and to defende themselues against the two knights. Rosicleer hauing so good helpe at hande, although he was stirred with the continuall heate of the foote battayle, would néedes be a partie player in the last act of this tragedye, and therefore chose out Brandagedeon to deale withall, and with hys sharpe sword gaue him so fierce a stoccadoe, that the bowells trayled after the weapon, and the Gyant fell downe. Now being thus put in possession of his desire, he came to the two knightes vtterin these or such lyke speaches. "I beséech you noble knights to lette me knowe at whose hands I haue receiued so good maintenance, that I may the better giue you thancks according to the state of your degrée and your demerites towardes mee. One of the knights aunswered. You are not to thancke vs, for your owne hand had wrought your escape before our cōming, but neuertheles at your request we are contēt to discouer our selues, and straight wayes they vnlaced their helmets whereby Rosicleer knewe them, the one to be Bargandel and the other Liriamandro his deere friendes. Rosicleer after his presupposed thancks so happely stumbling on his friendes helpe, fell to other matters, and first asked of 

them for what cause they came thether, they made aunswer that the only feare they had left the Gyants knights should at once enclose him, moued them to abandon the court for his rescewes. And as this talke was intterrupted by the comming of the two gentlewomen and TelyoRosicleers squire to demaund leaue of serch in y^e Gyants boate for the cofer and fardell which had bene taken from them, so after the gentlewoman with leaue obtayned, departed for to search: these there knights began a déepe consultacion of their owne affaires and what they ought to do. Bargandel spake first in this wise. "We haue this moneth and more loytered very idelly in kyng Oliuerios court without exercise of armes or armoure, therefore it wer not misbeseeming vs knights if we should for a time forbeare our retourne to practise déedes of armes that our good name & honour may enlarge our credit in this kingdome, and be a meanes of the sure settling of our memories in this lande, and the rather thereto am I ledde, for that I will not feare any disworship or vanquish in your company. I am content sayth the newe knight with this or any other thing which you shall deuise. But what shall we doe with these gentlewomen. Mary saith Liriamandro, they shall retourne to the court with the dead body of the Gyant, ther to present his carcase before the Princesse Oliuia as a token from thée Rosicleer and in part of payment for the great dishonour which the Gyant hath profered hir in witholding hir Jewels. They may lykewise when they be there make all our excuses vnto the king for our so sodayne departure."By this time the gentlewomen retourned with theire owne carriadge, and what with the lengthe of battaile, and other accidents, the daye was so farre shutte in, that being verye darke they were constrayned altogether to tourne into a kéepers house néere at hande, where they were welcome at such warninge. For hee knewe the thrée knights at the great feastes, wherefore hée en-

tertayned them as honourably as he might. That night not hauing wherwith otherwise to busie themselues, and the opportunitie of the bearers putting them in minde of their mistresses, they gaue themselues to enditing euery man of seuerell letters vnto his loue and Lady. Bargandel and Liriamandro deliuered theirs vnto the gentlewoman of Lusitania, but the other not willing to make manifest his choyse for that time tooke Arinda a letter closely to carry vnto the Princesse Briana his good Ladie, and afterwardes amongst other talke he required to sée the cofer of Jewelles which the Princesse Briana sent to Oliuia, as it is had bene onely to haue séene the riches thereoff, Arinda gaue him the cofer which he opened, and tossing vp and downe as if to sée all the Jewelles, he secretely conuayed his letter to Oliuia vnder all the papers, and redelyuered he cofer without being suspect. Well to make and ende the talke had an end, & when y^e rest went to their reast, Rosicleer fel into his ordinary humor, driuing in his thought, the whole order of the deliuery, and hir receite, with hir manner of tourning ouer the papers to viewe euery Jewell, this being but the first assay of the humor, but when his fancie brought him to the finding of the letter, Lorde what a fight he sustayned, for the better vnderstanding whereoff, you must immagine a young scholler but lately entred into schole poyntes ouerséeing of hys théame before hée bringe it to the reviewe of hys schoolemayster, and beléeue mée in farre greater doubte hunge Rosicleer of his Ladyes lyking then the boye doth of his maysters. For in his reading of the blotted copie, as distinalye as if he were to gesse Oliuais coniecture vppon euery syllabule, good God vnto what a hard consure was the poore paper subiect, as if euery sēence had bene then arayned before him. For almost at euery lynes ende, he could saye. Eyther this was much, eyther this was to lyttle, or this is maymed, or this is rude and vnlearned, or this was not well and finely penned, or that was not

playne inough, or this is faultie, or this should be amended and to drawe all into a summe, in euery péece hee woulde blame either the lyttle witte in inuention or the lacke of eloquence in the deliuery of the matter, but cheifly his owne ouerboldenesse in presuming vpon so high a Princesse with so rude a discourse, and yet I dare say it did him good to beguyle the Princesse with this letter in the colour of a Jewell, which she must receiue and reade through, ere she could learne the contents theroff, or knew the penman. And beginning to recken a freshe after this comfort, he stayed himselfe vppon these two poynts, first that sith he was diseased, his remedye must begin by making his griefe knowne: second that his conscience tolde him ther was nothing in the letter, the truth whereof he durst not auowche as concerning either his owne person or the Princesse, and this was his nightes reste as I suppose.¶ Rosicleer and the two Princes seeke aduentures in the lande of Britaine, & the two gentlewomen carrie the Gyants bodye to Oliuerios courte. Cap. xxxvij.NOT much out of the same manner was the other knights sleepe, dreaming of their delights & other such toyes, but the next day they arose and armed themselues taking leaue of their hoast and the gentlewomen. But Rosicleer tarryed behinde to conducte the women a lyttle on their way, and to haue more secret conference wyth Arinda about the Princesse Briana, (the remorse of his conscience stinging him for stealing away so priuly from the Princesse) In the course of this talke he would sometimes name the Princesse his Lady, sometimes his oundresse, by which name he requested Arinda to make offer of his humble seruice with the best excuse shée might for his long absence, in that he had already entred the quest

of seeking the Prince Edward or Donzel del Febo his borther, and in such speaches hee brought them on their waye, afterward taking his leaue wyth a friendly embrace, hee posted after his companye whome hée ouertooke in short time. Sxe dayes these thrée knyghts rode together without happening vppon any thing worthy the recitall. The seuenth day in their way they sawe a farre off a knyght very tall and bygge made vppon a fayre stéede, by séeming a knight of greate account. There followed him two squiers, the one bearing his launce, the other his helmette, for the heate of the daye had made him vayle his headpeece, to put on a lyght Hat of taffata, and comminge neere they sawe that hee was of a good countenaunce, somwhat of colour dusky & blacke, but in making both manlyke and of good proportion, hys ioyntes well knitte and somewhat large wythall, which foreshewed greate lykelyhoode of strenghte and courage. Thys knyght straunger firste salutiag these three knyghtes ryding by, spake vnto them thus. "Tell mee my Lords I praye you, whether you be of king Oliuerios court or no, Bargandel aunswered him. Truely we are if we lyste, and so longe as our liking lasteth. But wherefore demaunde you thys. I wyll tell you sayde the knyght, soothe it is that I am a Tartarian borne in that parte of Tartary which bordereth vppon Europe, and trauaylinge to seeke aduentures I was caste by tempest of the sea vpon the countrey of Zeland, where I heard that many knights should assemble in this realme at a great feaste and iustes proclaymed by the Kynge, wyth a safe conducte warraunted out vnder hys owne signet, for all knyghtes Christians and Pagans, or of all Nations else besides whatsoeuer, thether to come and proue their valoure. I am as I saye, a wandering knyght and haue no other erraunt but to see suche good knyghtes and to trye my selfe amongest them. Uppon the reporte hereoff, as soone as my shyppe was rygged

and trymmed, and that the winde serued for my purpose, I entered in my shippe to arriue in thys lande. Nowe whether that the waye longe and daungerous by the ignoraunce of my Pilotte shutte mee from my hope, or that the reporters mistake the daye, or rather knewe it not. Since my comminge to lande I haue in many places bene assertayned that the feastes are longe agone ended, and that the moste parte of the knyghtes haue taken shippinge and departed into their countryes, notwithstandinge, leauinge behinde them suche a good memorie in the mouthes of euery man, as much it gréeueth me to haue loste my laboure. For thys cause laste remembred, I am in purpose for one monthes space to ryde throughe thys lande, and to deale with all knightes commers to proue whether their credite bée not aboue their desertes: wherevnto I haue sette thys condition, that if any of them dismounte mee or make mée yeelde, that then I must faythfully accomplishe all that whiche the vanquishour shall wyll mee. But if I vnhorse any of them or take any of them prisoners, then the vanquished shall commende mée to the kynge Oliuerio, and make offer of hys or theyr liues and goodes at his courtesy as a simple token of my great good will towards him. Since this determination three dayes haue I iourneyed in this lande, and I haue encountered ten knightes whome I haue sente accordingly to king Oliuerio. And my Lordes whether are you retayninge, to the Englyshe courte or nor, for if you be I maye not breake my vow although by your semblaunce & riding you shewe to me as the best knights which I haue séene in my lyfe.This sayde the knyght straunger, and the other thrée knyghtes were easely brought to the allowinge of the conditions. Wherefore Bargandel whiche had vndertaken to aunswere, sayd. Syr knyght we thancke

"you for the large recounte you haue made vnto vs of your hether comming, and as to your ouerlate arriuall and the conditions set to the tylte, albeit I may not mislike them beeing so equall, yet for my parte, I aunswere and for these knightes that wee woulde not gladly deale wyth you vppon so lighte occasion, for rather will wee honour straunge Knightes then in any wise be an incombraunce vnto them, but sith it is your earnest sute, and that therein wee shall doe you seruice wee wyll not refuse you, and by the leaue of these my Lordes and fellowes, my selfe will bee the formost. But by God Syr knight, there is the Ladye Siluerina in the Englishe courte, and if I fayle not of my purpose I will make you kisse hir white handes, ere you bee many daies elder." But Bargandel fayled in deede of his purpose, for though he was very valyaunt knyght, yet was he but younge, and the Tartarian was both mightie and well exercised.After the Tartarian had buckled on hys helme, and Bargandel had obtained leaue of hys fellowes to bee the first in this aduenture, either of them clapped their spurres to the horse sides, and their encountry was suche that Bargandel brake his speare in small shiuers in the sheelde of hys enemye, causinge the Tartarian to lose the raynes and to wreath somewhat in hys saddle. But the Tartarian ouerthrewe Bargandel, horse and man to the ground, and wyth the tourne to recouer the raynes dressed hymselfe in his saddle, passinge foorth gallauntly, whyle Bargandel laye on the grounde very angrye and desirous to haue had the combatte with the sworde. Rosicleer and Lyriamandro muche wondred at theyr shockes, Lyriamandro then tooke the nexte tourne, and Rosicleer bycause the straunger wanted a speare, sente hys owne staffe vnto hym whiche peraduenture if hee coulde haue forseene the euente, hée woulde not haue done, for by it Liriamandro was hurled to ground, 

and the Tartarian almost vnhorsed, hys styroppes béeing broke and himselfe caste vppon the arson of hys saddle. The Tartarian knyght was much abashed at the great force of these two knyghtes, for hée had not thought to haue mette two so stronge knyghtes in all this lande, and when there remayned none but one knyghte, and he lykewyse without a staffe to iuste withall, hee came to this one and bydde the base to the swoorde play, in these termes."Syr knyght, sith both of vs wante speares to iuste withall, it shall be well to make vp this lacke wyth our swoordes, that you maye either reuenge the shame of your companyons or else goe wyth them for companye, and all three present your selues prisoners to the kynge your Lorde. Whose courte notwithstandinge I shall highly commende off for the greate vertue whereoff my selfe hath had proofe sufficiently in your fellowes. Assuredly Syr knyght (sayd this odde man which was Rosicleer) were it not for the duetie whiche I owe to my companions, and for that you shoulde ill acquyte their courtesies if you shoulde leaue me scotfree to scorne at their mishappes, I woulde that thys combatte wyth swoords should be excused, for that I am not accustomed to fight for so small a cause, but sith that both my companions challenge thys at my handes, and that it is a poynte of cowardlynesse to leaue the combatte, and also that you will not haue vs to breake companyes. I condiscende to your deuyse with thys prouiso, that if by good Fortune I ouercome you my companions shall be fréed from your charge, & you shall goe in their roomes to kisse the kinge of Englands hande, as I am sure it will doe you good to haue acquaintaunce with hys grace. I am well pleased heerewyth aunswered the Tartarian," and so sayinge hee drewe out a fine swoorde, Rosicleer likewise drawing his. Thus began the braue combat in which they continued a long time, no aduaun-
 
tage being espyed on either part by the beholders, what was within them, themselues best knew. But Rosicleer rather delighted then afraye at his enemyes courage, deuysed by himselfe howe to winne that valyaunt knight for friende and to leaue the combatte, for vppon so slender a quarrell hee thought the hazarde would be to great. Mary for all that he dyd his best, for when he felte the stronge buffettes hee coulde not but yelde the like. The Tartarian knyght burning in rage, rather to haue y^e mastry ouer so valiant knights, rather thē for any ill will he bare to Rosicleer, compassed howe by mayne force to subdue his aduersary, & in this thought he strake so furiously that with his charge and the others aunswere the noyse was so confused and great wythall, that it was hearde vppon the toppe of hylles and the shotte of Artilerie: When the Tartarian knight was so well heated as you haue heard, hée draue a blowe with both his handes full at Rosicleers head, which lighting vppon the fine and inchaunted helmette, nothwithstandinge depriued Rosicleer of his eye sight & enfeebled his hearing at that time. But Rosicleer could not so soone forgette it, and therefore whyle it was freshe in hys remembraunce, he restored the lyke blow which in y^e descending missed the Tartarians crest, otherwyse it had put hym in daunger. But slydinge vppon his shoulder it was so heauie that it made the Tartarian stoupe to his horse backe. The next daungerous blowe which the Tartarian gaue, made Rosicleer boowe vnto hys saddle both the swoorde and the raynes falling from him. Bargandel and Lyriamandro standinge by fell therewyth into a straunge admiration of the Tartarian in that hee not onely kepte Rosicleer play, but put him to his troumps, & well abated, seeinge they knewe nowe howe well hee coulde handell his weapon. And Rosicleer hauinge got greater courage through the griefe of his wounde, kept

no more his seate, but rysinge in his styroppes and recouering his sword which was fastened with a lyttle chayne vnto his saddle bowe, he hit the strong Tartarians so great a blowe, that the bloud gushed out both at his eares and nostrelles, and hée laye for dead vppon the crooper, the horse carryinge hym aboute the fielde tyll he reuiued. After not without some abashment as one come out of an other world: the Tartarian when hée felte the bloude issuynge in suche measure, lyft vp his hande and callinge for helpe on hys Gods, sayinge. Assist mee O my Gods agaynste thys fell knyghte, for if I tarrye more of these blowes my lyfe shall soone bee ended, and when he had so sayde, as purposed to make an ende of the fraye hée tooke his swoorde with both hys handes, and wyth all hys force followinge the blowe, he smote Rosicleer vppon the helmette to no greate harme on his bodye, but the weight thereoff astonished hym as muche as if a Towre had falled vppon hym, whereat Rosicleer waxed madde angrye, and not remembringe that whiche before hee had premeditate as to ende the battayle in quyetnesse, hee repayed the trespasse wyth treble dammage to the Tartarian. For albeit the Tartarian myght well bée reckened amonge the moste famous knightes of elder tyme, beeing couered wyth a helmette so well tempered as any Prince myght haue, yet liuinge in that age and encounteringe suche knyghtes, hys roome was but nexte to the beste. And when hee sawe that terrible blowe ouer hys heade, hee coulde haue wyshed a whole mountayne betwéene hym and it. But there needed no suche impossible meanes to auoyde thus misfortune, for it was prouyded by the diuine maiestye of God that thys noble knyght shoulde dye a Chrystian, and that greate friendshyppe shoulde growne betweene these three knyghtes, and therefore God so dyrected Rosicleers hande, that it fell not right, but glaunce-

ing downe vppon the shoulder, it notwithstandinge tourned the Tartarian from his horse, wyth so greate paine on hys ryght shoulder that hee myght not ryse hymselfe vp agayne, wyth thys fall hys buckles brake and the naylinges rente, and béeinge then halfe vnarmed, hée threwe hys swoorde from hym, puttinge hys knée to the grounde to gyue thanckes to hys immagyned Gods for their deliuery from so furious a blowe, and then tourninge towarde Rosicleer, he sayde. "Noble and valyant knyght, the strongest and mightiest whiche I haue euer knowne, or haue beléeued euer to haue bene in thys courte or others, pardon mée my rashnesse for I haue bene mysaduised when my wyll firste put me foorth to contende with you, onely your greatnesse of body and comlinesse might haue sufficed to teache mee that you were more valyaunt and stronger then I am, and sith I am nowe vanquyshed, and rather by greate myracle escaped wyth lyfe from your handes then my myne owne cunninge, saye on what you commaunde, for I am preste to accomplishe all that whiche was agreed uppon before our combatte, and my duetie shall not bee slacked in any pointe, but I woulde rather fulfill more than all that, for to gayne the societie of your worthy person and your companions, for I neuer mette with more nobler knightes for valoure and bounteousnesse, and so saying yelded himself. By thys speach the furye and choller of Rosicleer was well slackte, and béeing gladde to sée the Knyght so humbled before him, hée aunswered. Good knight I accepte in good parte that whiche you haue sayde, and it gréeueth me muche to haue had the battayle with you, for vnto a knight straūger and valorous, I had rather be a meanes for procuring a honour and ease, then their trouble and incombraunce, & as to the articles of the couenaunt which you remember me off. Beleeue mée I would not haue exacted them at your handes, and it shal

be yet in your choyse whether you will fulfill them or no, and yet I feare not but that you shall well like of your seruice to the kinge Oliuerio himselfe, beeinge a good knight and a great honourer of straungers. Likewyse we three shall take it as a signe of your good liking toward vs, if you make vs priuie to your name, that hereafter we may knowe you and doe vnto you that honour which so good a knight meriteth. Sir knight, aunswered the Tartarian, I haue great desire to goe and kisse the hande of king Oliuerio, as well to knowe him as to satisfie that which I owe vnto you, and will not fayle to depart and take my way toward the king. But to your last demaūd I am as I tolde you before a Tartarian and my name is Zoilo Prince and heyre of that kingdome whiche I would with good will forbeare for some timei, f you and these knightes would vouchsafe your acquaintaunce and company, for I haue more desire to trauayle in these partes then in that countrey from whence I came, bycause there is no coninuall afforde of knightes and fresh accidentes as I finde in this kingdome, and I shoulde more highly esteeme of the friendshippe and societie of such noble and worthy knightes then of any riches in the worlde. And nowe for that I haue declared who I am, I shall thincke my selfe farther in your debte if you make your selues farther knowne vnto me." Rosicleer and his companions gladly heard of his byrth & lignage, but much gladder of the friendshyp whereto he requested them, so they gaue him manye thancks, & told him who they were. Diuers speaches of great courtesy passing betweene them, whereby their amitie was so sure confirmed that it remayned vnto the death, euery one laboring to be found most friendly. And this done they appoynted that Prince Zoilo should goe to the court, onely to haue a sight of the kinge, and that Rosicleer with his companions shoulde abyde hym thereabout, then they foure to trauaile together whether For-

tune woulde carrye them. This being concluded, the Prince of Tartarye tooke his waye towarde the courte of king Oliuerio thinking long to finde the time for his retourne. They tooke the way towards a forest where the history leaueth them, to intrreat of the gentlewomen in the meane tyme, which broughte the bodye of the great Brandagedeon vnto the courte of king Oliuerio.¶ The gentlewomen brought the bodye of Brandagedeon to the courte, and the Princesses receiued the letters of their knightes. Cap. xxxviij.GReat was the griefe which the Princesse Oliuia felt by the absence of Rosicleer, that neither hir high estate nor the courtly disports suffised to make hir forget hir care, or helpe hir to couer hir lyking, but in hir lodging she would be without company in the day and in the nighte without sléepe, euer wishing to sée him agayne whome she loued more then hir selfe, for hir minde prophecied to hir that she shoudl not sée him very quickely, and as it is naturall for the patient to communicate hys griefe with the Phisition, iudging this some ease where the principall remedie wanteth. So the faire Princesse as vnacquaynted and to beginne in such passions, not being able at the first to counsayle hir selfe otherwise, thought it best to discouer hir griefe to one of hir gentlewomen "named Fidelia the faythfullest and most secret of hir householde, the which many times had importuned hir to knowe the cause of hir sorrowe, and one night as she was alone with hir the Princesse sayde to hir. Thou knowest my Fidelia how among all the Ladyes and gentlewomē which I haue, I haue chosen thée only for y^e faithfull treasorer of my secrets, & I haue not done nor thought the thing which I haue not emparted with thee, which hath come to passe onely by the loyall and good seruice,

wherein I haue alwayes found thée plyant and dyligent, with the like confidence vnto that which I alwayes haue reposed in thee, I will vnfolde vnto tée a secret, which none in the world my selfe except and thy selfe shall learne at my hands, in the concealyng whereoff, vnto this day I haue a thousand times endured lyttle lesse then deathe. And the matter is such, that it is vnfitting for any one to be a dealer therein but my selfe and thy selfe whome I account as my selfe. At a woorde by Fidelia that tyrant loue which spareth neither high nor lowe, hath taken possession of me by the great prowesse and beautie of the newe knight, and I am sure that but my deathe, nothing can sette mee frée: althoughe I haue studyed all possible meanes of my lybertie, and thereto haue sette the defence of my honesty and great estate to withstande this conceit, yet for all that I can doe, as longe as this knights race is vnknowen I cannot case my selfe, my former remedyes seruing me only agaynst the temptacion of the flesh, and not to driue out the remembraunce of his personage, whence my desire springeth. And truely I cannot perswade my selfe other, thē y^t this knights offspring is right noble, he béeing of so courtlyke behauiour and knightlye prowesse the truth hereoff, béeing somewhat more incredible, then the lying fables of our auncient Poets. Now if he be a Prince borne, the onely hope to haue him for husbande, my father and he being therwith pleased, may yeelde one some comformt, in the meane time while opportunite serueth for the finall accomplishment. Wherefore myne owne Fidelia seeing that I haue fully layde open the bottome of my heart, that which remayneth one thy parte, is to trauayle with his squire or some other to witte of what parentage Rosicleer is." Fidelia had lystened very attentiuely to that which hir Ladye had sayde, and as shee was very wise, so perceiuing by the dryfte of the speache, that neither hir mistresse maladye coulde be remoued by counsayle, nor that she woulde accepte of

it if it were bestowed, besides that, that hir desire was lawefull to match with Rosicleer, if there were not disparage in his stocke. She coulde not gaynesay hir mistresse in flatte termes, but made aunswere, that sith hir grace had layde that charge vppon hir shée was contente to receiue, as also readye to offer hir seruice in any other thing for this matter which she now moued, she sayde that sith hir graces purpose was so good shee shoulde not neede to remember hir farther in it, for that so soone as Rosicleer shoulde retourne she woulde be in hande with his squyre to boult out the truth of euery thing, and yet (sayth shee) I cannot beleue by reason of his mangnanimitie but that he is descended from some noble progeny, which if it so be I lyke verye well that your grace is so affectioned towardes hym, otherwise I dare not aduise you, but yet I will tel you my fancie, it wer better for you to abide some payne, then to make your head of your vnderlyng. The beautifull Princesse was well apayed at this counsayle so iumping with hir former determination, and it greatly asswaged the mallice of hir passion, in that shee had bewrayed it to hir trusty seruaunt. The next day the gentlewomen entred into the pallayce, driuing a horse before them loded with the Gyants body. At their entraunce the hurly burly in the court was so great, euery man running to sée the wonder, that the king with all those which wer with him and the Princesse Oliuia with hir gentlewomen ranne to their windows to sée what the matter was, and when they sawe the Gyant they knew hym, and as newely abashed at Rosicleers vertues, they began to commend of him as of the best knight in the world. The gentlewomen presentlye were broughte before the king which receiued them courteouslye, and they in order declared vnto him and the rest what which had chaunced to Rosicleer since his departure from the Cittye. The king lyked verye well of all, saue that when they tolde hym that the knightes could not retourne presentlye

as minding to pursue aduentures. For the king feared, left by being so much enclyned to knightly déedes, theire good succes would carrie them farther off then should be for his pleasure. But the gentlewomen departed form the king to do their message vnto the Princesse Oliuia, whom they founde in hir chamber with the two other Princesses in hir company. Comming before hir they delyuered their message with commendacions from Rosicleer and the two Princes, which had sent hir that Gyant so dead as a satisfaction in some parte for the detayning of hir Jewelles. The Princesse pleasauntly laughing at that presente, caused the gentlewomen to go on in that storye, and to make reporte of all occurrentes in their iourneye, which they did so faithfully that the Princesse in the tellyng was not able to colour hir affection towardes Rosicleer. This tale ended, Arinda gaue into hir handes the packette, which the Princesse opened, and tourning ouer the Jewelles founde a letter, which she put in hir bosome taking it to be Brianas, and in lyke sorte the gentlewoman of Lusytania made delyuerye of Bargandel and Liriamandros vnto their Ladyes, with the cofer vnto Rodasylua. The two Princesses, Syluerina & Rodasylua being great friendes, went both together in a closette to reade without interruption their loues letters so eloquent and so fraught with amorous speaches, which much reioyced the young Ladyes to be beloued of so good knights and not to breake off their seuerall commendacions of their knights and Lordes, wee will speake of the Princesse Oliuia, who being left alone for y^e company of y^e two Princesses dispatched hir other gentlewomen into diuers parts of the chamber, to haue a more secret suruay of Brianas letters.When shee had redde on through that which was deliuered with the packet, she tooke that other out of hir bosome, which shee had founde in ransacking the packette, and opening it she sawe in capytall letters RO-SICLEER subscribed, wherby she knew it to be his, & somewhat troubled she foulded it vp quickly agayne, minding to learne by what meanes that letter was hidde among the Jewelles. And therefore calling Arinda she asked if that any one had vnlocked the cofer, after that hir Ladye had delyuered it vnto hir. Arinda supposing that the Princesse had wanted something, aunswered. No truly Madame, for I haue alwayes kept the keyes, and no body euer had them at my handes but Rosicleer, which requested to sée the Jewelles when we were in the kéepers lodge, and in my presence he shutte it, restoring mee the keyes and not taking out ought whereof I can accuse him. The Princesse smelling out Rosicleers shifte, and somewhat smiling withall, to heare wherevnto Arinda had construed hir meaning, replyed merely thus. I asked it not gentle friende for that I thought there wanted any thing in the cofer, for it was wholly lost when it was in Brandagedeons power, but I asked it for that I meruayled it fell out so well, when Brandagedeon was the kéeper. Arinda waxing bolde hereat. Nay mary sayth shee with your fauour noble Princesse, Brandagedeon misgeuing in his minde how little time he shoulde enioye it, tooke litle care for the opening.So thys question who opened it was concluded in a laughter and little talke continued after. The Princesse thincking long til she might alone reade Rosiclers letter, and therfore somewhat earlyer then shee was wonte, shee withdrewe hir selfe into hir bedchamber with onely Fidelia in hir companye to sée hir in bed. When the dore was fastened, shee drewe out Rosicleers letter and not hauing power hir selfe to reade it, shée gaue it vnto Fidelia. The tenour of the louing letter was this, which héereafter followeth.¶ Vnto the most excellent Princesse: the Princesse Oliuia,THat which is appoynted by God mightie Princesse, maye not by mans power be altered or peruerted, as in my selfe I proue it, for since that mine eyes first tolde me of your beautye, and my iudgement gaue consent therto and that my will hath procured lyking thereoff in my affection, I haue felte an alteration in mee so incurable, that striuing with it both by arte and nature, I haue not hetherto found my remedy: which thing good madame I trust cannot séeme more vnlykely to, then it hath bene to me in the féeling terrible. The clappe of the thunder is the greater when it meeteth with the thickette able to make more resistance, longer lasts y^e kyndled fire in y^e builded Oke, then in the parched strawe, and more vehement is the fighte betwéene two enemyes, then when the one yéeldeth. What force loue hath as I coulde well with your Ladyshippe to consider in mee, or to féele in your selfe, so at least I beseeche you to waye by others and to beléeue reporte, howe that with lyght assaults, he beateth downe the stoutest courages, and with gentle cords bindeth the biggest armes, that his force, neither the wiseth nor the myghtiest were able to resist, that from his subiection not Iulius Caesar the greate Monarche of the worlde coulde free himselfe: that he quelled the pride of the mightie Carthagenian in the delyghts of Capua: and fettered Mars and Iupiter two Gods of the Gentyles in chaynes of Iron: that he transformeth men into sundrye shapes, and as it were by sodayne inchauntment framed the armestrong Hercules to the distaffe and spyndle: Aristotle to be bridled and saddled that he clymeth the highest toweres and stretcheth to the lowest valleye: that hee deuydeth the harde rockes and bloweth throughe the easye passages: to conclude, nothing so strong and inuincible, but that loue can ouerthrowe, and doth what

him lysteth. So that if I confessed my selfe yéelden vnder so mightie a conquerour, I shoulde yet be blamelesse for my cowardise. Yet what haue I not attempted? if either counsayle of friendes, or myne owne witte, eyther Phisickes cure, or mirth of company might haue warranted my quyetnesse. So God, good madame spéede my writing as I ment not to touble you with my letters. But the weake complayne, and the diseased séeke remedy, as what griefe is so greate or wounde so wide, but it hathe some redresse or other prouided in nature. To you therefore good madame thus boldely haue I discouered my vnrest, that by your meanes whence onely I may hope for it I may receiue comforte. And so attending your highnesse aunswere eyther of lyfe or deathe, I humblye kysse your Princely hande.The resolued to loue or not to lyue,Poore ROSICLEER.Rosicleer penned this letter either not well in his wittes or els greatly perplexed in his thought, so harde it is to finde an issue, but I beleue rather that it came from heart to hand, and was so sette downe, without farther aduise. Yet in the meane time that Fidelia redde the letter, the fayre Princesse broade awake to heare those amorous wordes, and féelyng them in hir heart with the lyke loue wherein Rosicleer wrote them. When it was ended heaping out aboundance of sighes vpon the argument of the letter, shée  sayde vnto Fidelia. Ah Fidelia what force may a tender gentlewoman as I am haue for to resist the tyrannye of loue, when so many famous and so mighty Princes could neuer cōquer him? Now may I ouercome him, which hath had the maystrye of so many, tell mee Fidelia and counsayle me what I haue to do in this matter, for I mistrust my owne wisedome, and very sielde is the passyonates iudgement very sure & requyste. Fidelia
nothing wondring at that effect which loue had wrought in the Princesse hir Ladie, for she rather wished hir selfe worthy of so glorious payne, aunswered hir thus. Madame to counsayle you arighte were to will you to defie loue, and to abandon Rosicleers companye, and yet the words of this letter leueth in me a doute theroff, if y^e matter be as true as the words importeth. Next were to desire you to haue an eye vnto your high estate, which yet me thincketh is not necessary, for I knowe you to be so wise, as that you will hazarde death rather then commit a thing so preiudiciall to your honour. Nowe there remayneth onely to learne out Rosicleers lynage, that if he be such a one as maye marry you without disworshippe, you may then beginne the redresse of both your wronges, otherwise if he fayle in that poynt, the first counsayle will be most conuenient to eschewe his presence, which shall in time doe away this affection, as in time all things are forgotten.Héere the Princesse interrupting Fidelias speach, replyed in this manner. Ah Fidelia, you thincke me not such a one but that although the loue which I beare vnto Rosicleer be such that it procureth me to will his presence, if he fayle in gentrye, I will rather thastise his boldnesse with perpetuall exile out of this lande, then giue him comforte to the empaire of my credite, and sooner will I dye an hundred times, then bestowe a countenaunce vppon such a one. But this I iudge of Rosicleer by the pure and loyall loue which he meaneth towardes mee, that it is lykely he may merite me for wife, otherwise it is to bee thought that in a knight so vertuous ther cannot lye hidden such impudencie as to moue a Lady vnto hir dishonour. In such lyke talke after the letter redde the Princesse and Fidelia passed the most parte of the nighte tyll Fidelia tooke hir leaue, the Princesse notwithstanding stil canuasing ouer the letter of Rosicleer, and euery swéete worde which he had written, and she prayed to God with

all hir heart that he might proue such a one as was not vnfitting for a Quéenes marriadge.¶ Arinda the gentlewoman belonging vnto the Princesse Briana tolde the bringing vp of Rosicleer vnto the Princesse Oliuia. Cap. 39.ARinda remained a long time in y^e court tarrying for such things as y^e princes Oliuia made ready for sende vnto y^e Princesse Briana, vpon which occasiō as it happened one day, y^e princesse Oliuia, Arinda, and Fidelia to be together, then Arinda not so well aduised as she ought to haue bene in the secrete affayres of hir mistresse, vnbryled hir tongue and declared to the Princesse Oliuia all the lyfe and dooinges of hir mistresse the Princesse Briana as farre as shee had any knowledge, and it may be that she added somtime more then truth, amongst other things in this tale she tolde of the little boyes which hade bene brought vp with the Princesse Briana, reciting the meruailous tokens which they brought from their byrth, and how that the sorrow of hir Lady was somewhat comforted by them, till Fortune brought one of them into a barke néere a great and déepe riuer running into y^e maine sea as you haue heard before, and that the other of xiiij. yeares, (the Princesse vnwittinge of it) stale away, after entering farther she tolde that the same Rosicleer which killed Brandagedeon was the same which departed without leaue when he was xiiij. yeares olde, whome shée knewe at the first sight, and had entreatie to retourne into Hungary. When the Princesse hearde this, driuing to the conclusion, she demaunded where the Princesse had those little boyes. Madame sayd Arinda, in this shall you sée the woorkes of God howe meruailous they be, whiche from so base a stocke can rayse so worthy ympes, and

you shall vnderstand that they be sonnes to a knight named Leonardo not of the most noble, but of the meanest knightes of the Citie, and for that their father hathe to wyfe a woman, sister to a gentlewoman of my Ladyes named Clandestria for hir longe seruice in great fauour wyth hir grace: for hir sake the Princesse made the parentes of these children to nourse them vp in the monastery at hir charges vntill they were all lost as I made mention. When the Princesse had heard Arinda in thys sorte blasing the offpring of Rosicleer, what sorrow may be compared vnto hirs, for in that instant she could wel haue yelded to death: and why? for that the onely hope of all hir remedy was in the conceite of Rosicleers hyghe estate, thereby meriting to be hir mate, which when shée sawe to bée cleane contrary, she was in suche a case as if hir soule had bene taking his leaue of hir body. When Fidelia sawe hir colour so soone chaunged, as vnderstanding from whence this effect procéeded, she rose vp, & desired Arinda with the other gentlewomen to voyde the chamber, for that hir Lady was newly entered into hir fitte whiche oftentimes hath taken hir, and she hath no remedy so present as to be alone. Arinda and the other gentlewomen not mistrusting hir speach, conuaied themselues into an other chamber. Nowe Fidelia béeing left alone with hir mistresse shut the doore, but Oliuia sancke downe in a sound, whom Fidelia fetched againe. Afterwardes béeing well recouered, and séeing hir selfe without other witnesse, she sent out a déep sigh with y^e company of many teares as seldome as a stormy winde without a shower of rayne: rufully withall making hir mone vnto Fidelia on this wise. Ah my Fidelia didst thou not heare what the gentlewoman of Hungary hath sayde as touching Rosicleer? if thou dyddest heare it, why dost thou not take part wyth mée in my insupportable griefe? were it any meruayle at all if my lyfe shoulde take ende with hir report? for sith the hope which he-

therto hath maynteined my rest is nowe ended, I would to God my life woulde ende withall, and rather woulde I dye not to heare such newes whereby my hope decayes then to be priuie to such a trueth, and liue without my comfort. Oh my Fidelia, come, come, and helpe mee nowe either to set forwarde my mishap with some desperate shyft, or to lende me thy faithfull counsell and aduise the better to asswage my griefe and to forgette the same misfortune which nowe assayleth mee. Alas I séee that it is not for my quyetnesse to bnanishRosicleer, and if by the excellency of my estate I am forced to chastyse his ouerboldnesse, in so dooing I shall both barre him from the sight & light of his eyes and make the stripe redound vpon myne owne head, for who shall receiue greater smarte by his absence thē I shall. What a wicked world is this, wherein men of force must neglect other mens vertues, and mangifie their owne nobilitie wythout deserte: were it not more reason to rayse this man to the toppe of honour y^t in him his posteritie may glory, then for lacke of auncestors famous for like qualities, to suppresse his vertue and kéepe vnder the magnanimitie of his courage? When began my fathers & grandfathers to be nobles, but when with the winges of vertue they soared aboue the vulgar sort, and if by their meanes onely I am aduaunced to be a Princesse, what thancke is there to mee of my highnesse? and thou Rosicleer if by those rare & souereygne vertues which flower and florish in thée, thou dost mount in credit, not onely aboue the baser sort from whom thou wast taken, but also aboue Princes & Lords, whervnto thou art to make thy assent, art not thou worthy of greater renowne then we others whych clymbing by vertue in lyke sorte, neuer yet came to the possibylytie of like worthinesse? Is not this a forgery of the world and a playne ingling wyth nobility, when we must make more account of one which perhaps by disorder of life defaceth y^e honour of his race, then of one which reacheth vp

the ignobilitie of his stocke, wherein consisteth nobilitye in the opinion of men, or in vertue in déede? and doe men inherit vertue as the chylde entereth vppon the Fathers lande béeinge lawfull heyre? No, héere wee receyue naught but what our selues sowe, and hée that repeath not maye be a loute for all his Lordshippe, as in tyme appeareth, whiche iudgeth fréely and wythout affection. And for mee, if the eyes of my vnderstandinge were not dymmed, I shoulde soone confesse lesse merite in me to deserue Rosicleer then wanteth in him to bee worthy of mé. I am a Princesse by my Father, and my glorye resteth in the reckening vp of a bed role of Princes, some of them dead a thousand yere agone, which nothing perteineth to thys presente age, but he maye be a Prince by hys owne vertue, and his nobilitie aryseth not by kéepinge a tally of names, but by makinge iuste proofe of his manhoode in defence of iustice euery daye, in suche sort likewise that not any of myne auncestors vertues whereby they became noble, dare approch to bee tryed with hys in an euen ballaunce. And is there not many gentlewomen in the worlde of as highe a callnge as I am? And is there any Prince or knyghte of so high renowne for vertue and knyghthoode as Rosicleer is? Haue not the best knightes of both Christendome and Pagansie, ioyned with him either at tylte or tourney, and doth he not obscure them all, as when the sunne appeareth, no starres dare come in presence? And I silly woman hauinge not so muche as the refuse in me of my predecessors vertue, am notwythstandinge by the iniurie of the times bonde to so greate folly, as that I must not thincke hym worthy to equall me, which is muche my better. But sith of force I must yeelde to the time and rather dye then acknolwedge the contrary, sith my Fortune is such that I must liue by the immagination of other men, and sith my estate may not be yoked with hys basenesse, haue at it, I

will for euer shutte him from my presence for the sauegard of myne honour. But withall seeinge wythout hys presence I cannot finde ease for this torment, I wyll make hym amendes by giuinge ouer my life vnto the enduringe of euerlastinge sorrowe. And if it bee beste so to doe, tell me my Fidelia my minde, for I perhappes am beguyled by my passion rather in deede haue I eyther iudgement or feelinge of ought but of griefe and sorrowe. Fidelia hearde the woords of the Princesse, and taking parte with the Princesse made vp this woful lamenting wyth hir sorrowfull speach, in this sort. Alas madame howe much better had it bene that neuer the knightly deedes of Rosicleer had bene manifested in Britaine, for then without the sight of him you had neuer receyued thys wounde whiche nowe festering in you for lacke of looking too will be very harde to be cured. But the wysest saye, that in suche matters as are harde and difficult a manne must especially employe hys trauayle, and that the successe is not so vnlikely, but that labours may reach vnto it, as for this griefe which nowe distempreth you is not so greate but that you maye bee soone whole, your selfe being ther vnto willing. For in this, neither Nature worketh, neither Fortune, nor the stars, nor the celestiall signes, nor any supernaturall influence as you suppose, but onely the fancie and likinge of man, the selfe same in effect with that which in the sicke is to desire to be whole and in the thirstie to drink. And whosoeuer with the consente of his owne will attempteth the breaking of these snares which hys fancy layeth to entrappe him in, may scape scotfree, and helpe others in lyke necessitie. Otherwise if this loue were naturall to all men, as all men then should loue by Nature, so should they not forbeare it, either for shame or friendes displeasure, and if it proceeded from Fortune, or by grace inspired, whereoff the cause is not knowen, but the euente is euident, then were our libertie herein irrecuperable, and 

in that the principall suite was wythout vs it might excuse the infirmitie of the pacient, whereas both experience proueth, that loue hath bene remoued by reason, and we dayly chide their impotency which are not able to resist the dartes of Cupid. It is therefore requisite madame that your selfe put to your hande and frame your will to the obeying of that which may bringe remedy, not onely for the loue which you presently feele, but for that which you feare will héereafter happen by your yll breaking off his absence.And truely I am perswaded that séeing you haue with your selfe resolued to exclude him from your companye that the best is to put it in practise faithfully and effectually, least by forbearinge of this correction hee take more courage to disturbe your rest, and yet am I not against that which you haue confirmed with good reason, that we ought to reuerence vertue rather then riches, and in my iudgement that gentlewoman which shall matche with Rosicleer may thincke hir selfe happy, for his rare and meruailous déedes of armes make him to glister more gloriously then al other Princes and knights whosoeuer. And in times past when all thinges went not so ouerthwart as they nowe doe, he was the best of lignage, whose prowesse was best knowen, and he best estéemed which wanne his estimation by his manhood. And to this purpose beholde the builder of Rome, by name Romulus, taken from his foster father a shepheard, and in a manner edified for y^e erectiō: although ther were many builders in the world both before and after, but the difference of their buildings lieth in y^e excellēcy of y^e workemanship. Againe, was ther euer one in such credit for honestie & wisdome as Socrates, the sonne of a base mydwyfe. Euripides one of the rarest men at euer were in tragicall poems, was borne of meane parentage. Demosthenes the flower of Greeke eloquence was a Cutlers sonne: Horatius the Poet borne of a bondwoman which had bene

taken prisoner, & yet all these preferred for their vertuous qualities before kings & princes. Cicero could not dissemble his progeny, & yet was he lifted vnto the consulship in Rome, & neuer proued other Consul so cōmodious for the common wealth. Serramus & Coimatus wise men, and throughly exercised in their enimies land were Consuls in Rome, & deliuered their countrie from spoile & pillage, & if for a matter perteyning to a kingdome, we had rather take example at kinges: let vs see if meane estate hath bene any let for men to aspyre vnto mighty kingdomes, and by name let vs take a more perticuler suruey of the thyrde, fourth, fifth, and sixt kinge of Rome. First Tullus Hostilius had his cradell in a shepheardes cottage, and his bringing vp in the wide field. Then the two Tarquins were sonnes to a Marchaunt and exiled their countrie. Seruius Tullius was sonne to a bondwoman as his name importeth, all which notwithstanding in their times were kinges of Rome, and if from thence we take our way to other Nations round aboute, what a flock of shepherds, surgeons, labouring men, founders, & such like seruile occupations shall we méete which aspyred to the highest palce of gouernment in their countries. Alexander a crowned kinge was a gardeiners sonne, Pertinax Emperour of Rome, borne of a slaue which lyued by thrashing of graine & selling of wood, Seuerus the seuenth Emperour of Rome was bred and brought vp amongst surgions, & these of the meanest sort. Agathocles king of Sicile, sonne to a potter. Maximianus & Maximns chiefe men of the Empire, the one of base byrth, the other doubtfull whether a smith or a carpenter, and yet neither barrell better herring. Vespasianus which was called the good Emperour, rose from low degree, & by his vertue blotted out y^e infamny of his progeny, & to haue more notable testimonies, who was father vnto y^e great Caesar Augustus y^e ruler of y^e world. Virgil in a iest made him a bakers son but his own minde misgaue him otherwise, as for a truth

worse be they which ryse to glorie from the mislikinge of their parents, like as Hercules, Perseus, & Iugurtha the kinge of Numidia, all begotten in aduoultry: and lykewyse mightie Alexander kinge of Macedon, as concerninge whom his fahter Philip on his death bedde denyed him to be his sonne by the reporte of his mother Olympia, for which cause after his fathers death hee woulde needes be called the sonne of Iupiter Ammon:Constantine the Emperour was borne of a younge mayde before lawfull espousalles: and Iepthah in the Scriptures was sonne to a harlot: Or if you will madame that for lyke examples we runne ouer the histories whervnto my witte can not carry me in so sodeine speach, yet I remember that fewe yeares since there dyed in Spayne a stoute kinge of the Gothes called Bamba, which as I haue heard was a labouring man, and at that time when he was to be crowned king was faine to sticke his spade in the ground to receiue the scepter, beeing neither lesse feared then his predecessors and not reserued by me to the last place, as one of least credite amonge others. Remember your selfe of the great king Arthur your progenitour, of whom (with your graces leaue) I doe not thincke that men of mallice doubted whose sonne he was: and we maye boldly speake of these and other thinges so longe a gone passed, without suspect of misliked affection. But why meruayle we at these thinges? doth not the wise man saye. That if our life were long we should see many kings become bondmen, and of many bondmen crowned kinges: the reason beeing the same as I haue rehearsed, that in elder age the onely Herolde to pronounce a man either noble or vnnoble was hys owne good deedes which aduaunced his good name and renoune aboue the inferior deedes of kinges or Princes. But to paynt out the pryde of our times, let vs cast downe our eyes to y^e first root, from whence we al take our beginning, shal we not finde it all one for all men? Mary

in the body of this trée there are many braunches, some higher and some onely waterboughes, from whome the toppeboughes keepe of the comforte both of Sunne and showers, yet no man I trowe wilbe so enuyous as to hinder the growth of the inferior, if they be more faithfull then the superior, as not alwayes the tallest men doe the best seruice, and the best borne for wealth or mighte proue not the best alwayes for the manners and worshippe. Witnesse hereto the sonnes of Scipio and Marcus Aurelius, of which two descended two peruerse imps, far more infamous thē their parēts wer famous. And ther ar infinit moe lykewise to improue the succession of vertue, in the succession of enheritaunce. And yet for all this long discourse, I cannot choose but reserue my former purpose towards you, for I am afrayde that the most parte will not be of my iudgement. In a worde therefore, to make an ende in that wherwith he first beganne, you must consider both by what meanes and for what causes the times are altered, and therevppon take aduise according to the time. And sith that for our sinnes God hath giuen vs euer to a wrong iudgement in matter of high estate, rather to preferre wealthe then vertue, and sith you are nowe fallen vnto that time, wherein this errour generally hath ouergrowen the truth, and is strengthened by consent of men I would counsayle you to yéelde vnto the time, that is to take it as you finde it, & to make the best of your chaunce: for it were great folly for you, and no lesse daunger to resist a multitude, and you knowe your friends will neuer be brought to estéeme so highly of vertue in a base personage, although a precious stone can neuer be but precious whether sette in Leade or Copper. You must forsake him then, and that is the onely remedye, for according as I haue reade and haue hearde the first remedye agaynst a fitte of loue, is to exempt our selues from the companye of the beloued, or to shunne and eschew the things which maye bring it agayne to our remembraunce, the nexte

is to driue in our thoughts the things which be contratrary therevnto: as to thincke with how many breaches of sleepe and with what continuall care we desire a thing eyther filthy, if vnlawfully coueted, or at the least wyse transitory though neuer so honest, with all to sette before our eyes what hames, what robberyes, what murthers, what madnesse it hath caused in the world, whereoff ther be to many historyes: but yet from all this you may well acquite your selfe, if you will seperate from you your former conceit. And if none of these will suffice, there is an other remedy behinde, which is to bestow your lyking vppon such a one as may be machable to your estate. For as one naile driueth out an other so men say that the new loue dispossesseth y^e old, which remedy as I haue red was put in practise by Assyrous y^e kyng of Persia. And this is my opinion, which it may be your grace woulde not mislyke, were it not somewhat troublous, but if you haue an eye to your benefite, thereby I doubte not but that you wil wel ouercome the trouble, & I pray you spéedely take some way or other, but the best I saye still is the former for to alaye the flame. The next is, to take awaye the wood, and so to forgette loue, is to remoue from beloued, for otherwise that which you quenche in a moneth wilbe kindled in an houre.Nowe the meanes to achieue your purpose, is by writing your selfe to Rosicleer to this effect, that hee abandon your presence for euer, my selfe wilbe the carryer: althoughe I haue some compassion on hys payne. The Princesse knowing the holesome counsayle, which hyr Fidelia as faythfull friende had giuen hir, aunswered louingly, but yet with some conscience for hir owne smarte in these words.Those which are hole, can easely giue good connsayle to y^e sicke, & euery remedy seemes to them easy & possible, as in lyke sorte thou Fidelia not yet attaynted with loue, tellest me of many remedyes which not onely séeme con-

ueient vnto thé, but also so easye, that thou sayste it lyeth in my handes to make my selfe frée from the passyon which tormenteth me, I tell thée trulye that, I knowe both that I am not worthy of Rosicleer: and that besides it behoueth me to bannish him from my presence. This I knowe my Fidelia, but alas shall this by easye for me? Perhappes I maye make him auoyde the courte and countrey by the meanes thou haste prescribed: but what then? I haue a greater aduersarye within my selfe which makes this match so not euen as thou wéenest. I knowe that when Rosicleer shalt haue departed the land, that my lyfe will well néere departe my bodye, and I shall not easelye forgette mine owne choyce, But yet as thou willest mee I will aduenture to putte hym from his hope thoughe I beare parte of the smarte, and I had rather my bodye shoulde paye for it, then the honoure of the Princesse Oliuia shoulde bee blemishedde, nor neuer shall the force of loue be able to disparage hir. In thys heate shée called for penne, inke and paper, which being brought, she wrote to Rosicleer as you shall heare héereafter.I cannot thincke that for all hir greate stomacke to the maynetayne hir honour agaynst Rosicleers basenesse, that she coulde drawe those cruell lynes with drye eyes, but when she had made an ende, and closed vp the letter, as if she had gotte some memorable conquest sayth shee. Now dare I compare with y^e Romaine Matrones which for the preseruation of their honesty sacrifised themselues, vnto their Gods, for what haue I done els, but in a manner sacrificed my selfe to God, when for my honour sake I haue bounde and lynked my selfe to suche a continuall martyrdome and perpetuall imprisonment, as the absence of Rosicleer wyll bréede in me, and neuer more will lyue as a Princesse, but rather lyke a vowesse. But holde Fidelia take it, at which worde shee snet out such a sighe, and wept so bitterly as if hir hart had rent asunder. Fidelia
promised to doe the message, and aftter shee had comforted hir Lady departed speedely. I thincke fearing lest the Princesse should reclayme hir opinion.¶ Fidelia beeing on hir waye to carrye the letter to Rosicleer was taken by sixe knights, and from them delyuered by Rosicleer. Cap. 40.FIdelia hauing already taken leaue of the Princesse to execute the cruell sentence pronounced vpon poore Rosicleer, was vppon better aduise called backe by hir Lady and made stay till the morrow. The next day cōming before hir Lady to giue hir warning of hir departure, scarse might shee obtayne leaue to go or tarrie. And when shee vrged y^e necessitie of hir going, stil the Princes would stay hir with some such speaches. Swéete Fidelia tarry yet, yet a lyttle longer sweete Fidelia, tarry till my lyfe leaue this carefull bodye, it will not be long my sorrowe prognosticates of my ende, if thou tarry till I haue ended this my wery lyfe go in Gods name then to Rosicleer, it wilbe to some purpose to let him vnderstand that though my body be dead, yet I mente mine honour should remayne sure for him. Fidelia payned hir sefe to comfort hir Lady and thinking it not best to enter any long talke, as if she had gone of some other erraunt shee stale priuily from hir mistresse in the company of other gentlewomen, the lesse to be suspected, and mounting vppon hir palfray, shée rode through the citie of London, all disguysed, to séeke Rosicleer.Ere long she came to the kéepers house, where the thrée Princes, had lodged, at whome shée learned that they were not farre from thence, so with great dilygence she hasted after them, and as their knightly prowesse left behinde them the memorie of their being there so wheresoeuer shee came, she styll hearde of them, and wythin

eyght dayes after that shée had lefte he kéepers lodge, she came within lesse then one dayes iourneye of the place where their abode was. That day passing alone through the thickest of a forest, there came out agaynste hir sixe knights, which tooke hir horse by the brydell, saying that she shoulde go with them, which when she denyed and beganne to pleade for hir deliuery with words of courtesie, one of them drewe out his sworde and sayde he woulde slay hir, vnlesse she prepared hir selfe to their companye, but whether she woulde or no they made hir palfraye go by force with them towarde the forest. Then Fidelia fering that they ment héerein some dishonour to hir personage lept from hir palfray, and one of the knights perceiuing it, alyghted to sette hir vp agayne: but shee getting from him, ran thence as fast as she might & by hir good Fortune it came to passe that when the knight had ouertaken hir, and helde hir in his armes to put hir vp vppon hir horse, that Rosicleer and the two Princes Bargandel and Lyriamandro then passed through the forest to séeke the selfe same knights, and to be auenged vppon all the euills, in which they had wronged that country. These thrée hering the sréeches and outcries which Fidelia made gotte néere the sounde, to knowe the matter: in the ende they sawe that the knights woulde carry a gentlewoman away agaynst hir will. At which (albeit Fidelia was so well muffled that none of them knewe hir) they were all displeased, and Rosicleer more angrye then the reste, sayd. Syr knights what is the cause that you force thys gentlewoman to go with you againste hir will. One of them in great scorne sayde. If you will néeds be of counsayle with vs, I wil pricke you the cause vpon my spears poynt. But Fidelia cryed. Ah my Lord delyuer me from these false théeues which will leade mée away prysoner I know not wherefore. Rosicleer hearing them both, without more to doe gaue one of them such a blowe vpon the breast with his launce that it pearced him throughe, and 

he fell dead to the grounde, the two valyant Princes ran astaynst two, and within shorte time slew them, the thrée which remayned sette vppon Rosicleer, but he clefte one with his sword and made the other two to gallope away. The two Princes loth to lette any of them escape, followed them in such sorte, that they foure were now entred in to the thickest of the wood, Rosicleer being alone wyth the gentlewoman. Fidelia now at lybertie and onely the company of Rosicleer, stoode in a doubte whether after so great courtesie, she might in hir mistresse name declare so vncourteous a message, but remembring hir selfe to be at an others commaunde, vnto whome shée had promised hir fayth in this matter: the time also so fitte for the accōplishing of hir Ladyes charge, she discouered hirselfe to Rosicleer who presently knewe hir, and much abashed to sée hir in that plyghte, alyghted form his horse to embrace hir, and as it hath bene recounted, his speach was on this manner. What misfortune fayre gentlewoman hath broughte you from that heauenlye courte, wherein you were once acquaynted, to séeke harborow among such vnciuill hostes as these knightes are. Fidelias aunswer was shorte in these termes. O noble Rosicleer, the anguish which Fidelia féeles is in déede greate, but yet it onely ariseth through the remembraunce of that message which she hath in charge vnto Rosicleer, and with that she wept bitterly. Then somewhat amazed he sayde vnto hir. Tel on faire gentlewoman, and if your sorrowe be for my sake let me beare part with you, and thancked be God, I am not altogether a straunger to mishaps: yet wist he not whereabout hir message was, but hee being very earnest to haue y^e message told him, she drew out the letter out of a little boxe, and put it into his hande with so much payne that she could not speake a worde withall. Rosicleer hauing the letter and desirous to knowe what was in it, opened it presently, wherin he soone espyed the set determination of the Princesse as touching his exile,

but before he had wel wayed of the contents, espying only Oliuias name in the inscription, as we say that mens mindes misgiue them agaynst a mischiefe: so his hearte throbbed, all his body trembled, and hee had much adoe to force himselfe to endure the vttermoste. The letter sayd as followeth.¶ The high and mightie Princesse, the Princesse Oliuia, Princesse of great Britayne: vnto the most arrogant Rosicleer sendeth perpetuall disgrace for thy lewde attempt.BEing no lesse iniuried by the presūption thē minding the punishment of thy folly I haue written vnto thée. And know thou y^t thy letter hath come not to me in daylyht, nor delyuered in thy name lest I might iustly haue refused it, but in y^e night time, & y^t closely and by stealth conuayed in my cofer that I might firste be beguyled, ere I mighte forethincke me of the deceyte. The receiuing whereoff albeit so at vnawares, hath somewhat blemmished my honoure, and the shame thereoff if I thought possible to be rubd out, I would not spare for Tems water being so nere my fathers pallaice, But to make amends for my faulte, and least  take some pride in thy impudencye, I am dryuen nowe to an other inconueniencye, that is to aunswere thee, whome otherwise I woulde not haue vouchsafed in this respecte, the courtesie of a good looke. In thy letter, the firste poynte of thy pryde I finde, to bee in bending thy lyking towards me. The seconde and greater, in daring to manyfest it vnto me. The thirde and especiall in forcing me by copy of wordes, and an olde tale of loues power to giue some reliefe to thy heauinesse. Which thy intollerable pryde as it séemed rare and straunge vnto mée, for it made me more narrowely to sitte and examining my selfe throughly and in euery poynte, if eyther the lyghtnesse

of my lookes or my vnchaste demeanoure, or the lacke of foresight in my speach, or the familiaritie of acquaintance mighte giue occasion to so base a knight as to attempte a Princesse. Wherein if I could haue called to minde any little ouersight, whereby thou mightest haue courage of impeaching my honour, I woulde first haue punyshed it in my selfe as I am now purposed to amende it in thée. Onely I remember, I bestowed vppon thée largely: and what then? Thou therefore as Lucifer hauing more grauces then thy fellowe Angells wilt pull GOD out of his throne? Note that the staye of true vertue is humilitie, and there is no glory so cleere but pride maye darken it. Bicause I humbled my selfe so much as to thinke of they meane vertues, wouldst thou venture this? Dyd my beautie cause thée to loue me, & could not my estate withholde thy penne but thou must challenge me for it? I was aboue thy reach, and why diddest thou not feare thy ouer strayning, if thou mentest to compasse mée? God neuer punisheth the desire of things allowed by nature, but thou shalte finde ocasion of smarte in thy disordered affection. What if loue be so great as thou painest thy selfe to proue vnto me? Did not other Princes sée mee, from whome yet the honest regarde of my greatnes shielded me, which tho uer entred into so abiecte a breast as thine is. Yet  forsooth and Hannibal, and Mars and Iupiter, were ouercome with lyke passions. What euer good lyking I might haue had to them, I tell thée I lyst not to heare Poore Rosicleers tale. Thou wilt haue mée so to use clemencie towardes thée, as I shal therby to be cruell to my selfe, otherwise thou byddest my losse. Then must I haue regarde, and for euer cease thou to trouble me in lyke manner. Or if bicause thou louest mee, I muste deale with thée accordinly, I am contente, but to thy greater griefe. For marke, the greater loue, deserneth the great chastisement: and greater is the faulte done vppon presumption, then by ignoraunce or infirmitye,

as much lesse sufferable is the disgrace wrought by a friende then by a foe, and thelouers vnkindnesse is lesse excusable then the straungers. Thou professest thy selfe my friende and louer, and I protest and proclayme my selfe nowe to be wronged at thy hande. Judge thy selfe howe I can beare it? For this iniury whiche thus spighteth me, I charge thee auoyde this court, forsake the lande, and if thou meanest good to me, get thee thether from whence neuer newes of thy name maye be brought to England. This way shalt thou proue thy loue, and els not, & so shee leaueth thee tyll doomes day. Thy mortall enemy,Olivia.When Rosicleer had read the woordes of the letter, the contentes thereoff so galled him at the quicke, that for very griefe his sences forsooke him and he fell vppon y^e ground, ther remaininge an whole houre wythout mouing foot or hād & Fidelia departed: so soone as Fidelia was gone, TelyoRosicleers esquire came that way to seke his Lorde, for he had departed form him before to fetch fresh water at a fountayne hard by. Now when Telyo approched and sawe Rosicleer stretched in that manner vppon the ground as if he had bene dead, he made the greatest dole that euer poore creature made, and alighting from his horse he plucked off Rosicleers helmet, casting water in his face if perhaps hee might reuyue. In the ende Rosicleer yelding foorth a grone as if his heart stringes had burst withall came wholy to himselfe, and stretching his ioynts vpon the gréene grasse, began to speake in this maner. O fell Fortune and euer spightfull, why hast thou not made an end of my life which the end of my ioy, and why lyue I sith that whereby my life is bereft mée. Leaue me alone I praye thée and my griefe shall not grieue me without thy company, aboue all welcome

death the vndoer of my care, welcome my death in what manner I care not, suffer not a knight so vnfortunate to appeare amongst men, nor to receiue common sepulture. Cato not to beholde the conquerours face, slewe hymselfe wyth his swoord, and Sophonisba poysoned hir selfe to be frée from bondage. Nowe what reason was there in them by death, to flye common and ordinarye mishaps: If I mainteyne my lyfe to the abidinge of farre greater tormentes then are in death. And whence commeth this mischaunce vnto mée? from loue. Of loue, loue, farre more outragious then fire and water, and farre more daungerous to deale withall then chaunce or Fortune. Thou art straunge in all thy purposes, straunger in the execution of them, and in the ende thereoff straungest of all. Howe commonly doe thy practices excéede the working of Fortune, for she neuer giueth paine but in pleasure, neuer griefe but in gladnesse, and she neuer ouerthroweth but at the top and pitch, so that ther is yet some comfort to haue bene high, but I which in true loue towardes Oliuia had neuer countenaunce of comfort nor pleasure of any height, am nowe so disgraced and haue fallen so lowe as no aduersitie of Fortune can match it. Artemidoro tolde me my kinred shoulde not let our marriadge. But nowe farewell my friendes, by name Oliuerio kinge of the great Britaine my louinge Lorde, Bargandel and Liriamandro Princes inheritours and my louinge companions, and Farewell, Zoilo Prince of Tartary as my last acquaintance. Fortune did but shewe vs to eache other, when we hoped to great acquaintaunce, and farewell all my comfortes, for I will hence to some darke and cloudie country, that not so muche as the light of the Sunne may bringe tidings of my smart, this saying, Rosicleer rose vp, & mounting on his horse rode towarde the forest which leadeth vnto the sea with full determination to leaue the country

presently, his esquire Telyo which both sawe and heard his complaint, with great griefe followed him, not yet daring to speake a word for feare of disquieting him. Rosicleer in this iourney made great hast, & before night got to a huge and hollow rocke about x. miles from the place where he receiued the letter. There on he caste himselfe tourning his horse loose vpon the clifts. Now being alone as his maner was, he renued his complaints with many a sicker sigh. In the morning whē y^e Sunne cast his beames vpon the large sea, Rosicleer rose frō the ground to looke if he might see any ship wherein he might put himselfe, whē he espied none, he commaunded Telyo to ride vnto the next hauen about two miles off, there to prouide a shyp, himselfe promised in the meane while vnder that couerte to abide his comming, Telyo presently did as his Lord commaunded him & made as much speed as he might, not to leaue his master comfortlesse. But ere Telyo had got to the towne, it chaunced that Rosicleer hauing great desire to be solitary mounted vpon his horse and rode a contrary waye. In which waye he sawe a little shippe makinge towardes the lande, and out of this shyppe from vnderneth the hatches there appeared a gentlewoman very high and big of body, but of a good complection and straungely attyred as was hir countrye guyse. This gentlewoman as soone as the anchors were cast, caused the cockeboate to be let downe, wherein shée entered, and comming to lande she tooke hir palfray to galloppe vp the sandes, but espyinge a knyght alone whome by all semblaunce shee tooke to bée Rosicleer, shée framed a sorrowfull countenaunce, and in greate ruth saluted hym to whome he rendered the lyke salutations, demanuindinge what hir griefe was. The gentlewoman styll counterfaytinge a showe of greate sorrowe, stayed a tyme as not able to speake any thinge tyll béeing importuned by hym wyth much a doe she as it were forced out these speaches.Alas sir tell me if you can some newes of a new knight which hath wonne the prices at the greate feastes in London. Wherefore seeke you him sayde Rosicleer, I seeke him aunswered the gentlewoman, for that I heare so much of his glorie as that I am perswaded y^t he onely is like to giue remedy to my trauayle, Rosicleer to make hast away for feare lest his esquire shoulde finde them, opened himselfe vnto the gentlewoman, saying that he was the newe knight. The gentlewoman séeming to be very gladde for the haue found him knéeled downe, but he lyfted hyr vp and desired hir to saye on presentlye what hir sorrowe was, for he woulde wilingly vndertake hir demaunde: the gentlewoman sayde on thys wyse. Sir knight, not farre hence there is an Ilande where my Father dwelled, a plentifull land and auncient inheritaunce to our line. This lande my Father gouerned a great time in peace and ease, tyll that Fortune loth to preserue thinges in one estate, chaunged hyr copie, and that whiche griueth mee moste of all founde meanes by me to woork y^e discontentment of my friends. For beeing younge and marriadgeable, and my Fathers onely childe, it happened y^t I had many suiters, but to be short, my Father thincking it safest for the continuance of his line, and the peaceable gouernement of his people whiche had rather haue bene subiect to their naturall countrey man then an Alian, matched me with a lusty knight both best beloued for his worthynesse and of greatest possessions in all that countrey. Now amongest my other suters there was one of great liuelood, worthy for his wealth to haue bene preferred before all the rest, if himselfe had bene as worthy, but this Lorde was refused by mee, and takinge it as some part of disgrace be kindled his choller and wrathe against my parents and me, and at a time conuenient which was not many nights past, and when we least immagined it, he burst in vpon my parents, where he found but weake resistance,

but I my selfe in the meane whyle stealing by the shore side, recouered thys lyttle boate wherein I was scarcely entered, when I sawe a farre off my parents & my husband ledde away prisoners. I thincke they cannot iustly ghesse whether I am gone. But after that I was in the boate I mette with manye which came from the iustes at London. They seeing my heauye chéere, demaunded the cause, and when they vnderstoode it they directed me to inquire after a newe knyght in the land, for he alone say they is able to vndoe this iniurye. You heare sir both the cause of my care and the occasion of comming into this countrey to you sir, nowe sir knyght if my ruth may work any compassion, or that you thinke I haue cause to complayne, doe your best to amende my harme, you shall doe double iustice in restoring the wronged, and in punishing the wicked doer. Rosicleer féelinge a yerning in hys minde agaynst so vnlawfull a practise if her tale were true, badde hir take hir boate agayne, for he would hazard his person in hir quarrell. The gentlewoman desiring presently no other thinge, gaue hym many thanckes, so they entered the boate, and the water beinge calme they passed wythout any daunger. But still Rosicleer haunted with hys auncient thoughts, now seeing himselfe farre distaunte from the Princesse, and wythout hope to retourne began a freshe to consider of hys exile which thought so ouercame hym, that he wyshed hys soule to departe from hys body. But the History leaueth hym on the Sea to recounte in the meane tyme of his esquire, whyche finding a shyppe in the hauen retourned to hys Mayster, but not meeting hym he was sore abashed, and in greate sorrowe coasted ouer the countrey to finde hym out.After longe trauayle by lande to no purpose, hee put hymselfe to the Sea in a shyppe prepared towardes Almayne where after continuall wearynesse and not hearing any newes of hys mayster he tourneth for 
owne countrey in the valley of the mountaynes where he was well welcomed by his brethren. There let vs leaue him till time carry him from his Fathers home to meete with mayster. Nowe telleth the historye of Zoilo Prince of Tartary which had trauayled towards the court of kinge Oliuerio as hath bene recited. When hee came to the court, he founde in the pallaice hall the Princesse Oliuia with the king hir Father, and diuerse noble Princes deuising and sportinge of diuerse matters, and especially of Rosicleers worthinesse which not a little tickled the Princesse Oliuia for all that cruel sentence which she had giuen of him.The TartarianZoilo enteringe the hall in goodly nammer, to the great amaze of the knightes and nobles which beholde hym, after he had made hys humble obeysaunce to the kinge, hee spake as followeth. It maye be noble and worthy kinge, that the greatnesse of my estate forbiddeth me to be so humble, but the greate vertue whiche I haue founde in the knightes of your Maiesties court hath enforced mée aboue my wont to doe you that honour which I woulde denye else to any Kinge or Emperour in the worlde. Nowe I beséeche your maiestie to accept of my seruice and to receiue mée into the number of your knyghtes, for I haue great desire to belonge vnto your court if it so lyke you. The kinge very well likinge of the maiestie whiche the knyghte bare. Albeit hee knewe him not whence hée was, of courtesie embraced hym gladly, and raysinge hym from ground, aunswered thus. Sir knight you are very welcome, for as your personage and good behauiour is aboue the credit of a meane man: so haue I great opinion of your highe estate, and as to your request to be entertayned of my court, I receiue you willingly and promise you therein my royall fauour, for I would lyue no longer then to make of your likes, and I praye you sir knyght tell me who you are, least peraduenture I should

in not honouring you according to your callinge. Zoilo aunswered, moste puissaunt kinge, the reporte of your courtisie assured me your good fauour before I demaunded it, and nowe syr vnderstande you that I am named Zoilo, sonne to the kinge of Tartaria in that part which bordereth vppon Christendome, and that I haue spent many winters both on sea and land, till that Fortune cast me on the Englysh shoare, then comming out of Duchlande. After heere in your countrey, mindinge as my vsage was to trye my selfe vpon knyghtes errants it chaunced that I meete with thrée of your knyghtes in a forest, their names were as I leaned of them, Rosicleer, Bargandel, and Lyriamandro, with these I iusted, and after that I had cast downe the two last at the tilt, I fought wyth Rosicleer at the swoordes poynte, but in y^e ende I was vanquished. Rosicleer, when I was yelden hauing some lykinge of mee desired me to come and bee acquainted with your maiestie and to kisse your royall hand in his name.All which I haue done as well for to offer my seruyce to so myghtie a Prince as for to accomplishe the charge of so valiaunt a knyght, neyther thincke I it any dysgrace to bee vanquished by him. For besides that hys bountie and courtely meriteth to be beloued rather then enuyed hys valour and knighthoode promiseth the conquest ouer the whole worlde. He hath receyued mee for a perpetuall friende and hys acquaintaunce doe I more sette by then the whole kingdome of Tartary my lawfull enheritaunce.Therefore bycause I hope the longer to enioye thys newe friendshyppe in your seruice, I haue bene bolde to craue the name of your courte, which shall be as well welcome vnto mee as the tytle whiche you haue vnto your kingdome. The kinge was gladde to heare some newes of Rosicleer at that time, and muche praysed

his owne good Fortune to haue lighted vppon him, for that by him his court had dayly encreased in worshyppe, and so tourning towardes the Tartarian, he sayd on this manner. Pardon me mightie Prince in that I haue not done you that honour which apperteyneth to a kynges sonne, but the little acquintaunce I haue had wyth you and the ignoraunce of your estate shall excuse me hence forwardes, if I amende not let me be without excuse. And with these same woordes the kinge led Zoilo to the Princesse, willing hir to welcome the knyght straunger. Zoilo comming before the beautifull Princesse Oliuia, kneeled downe before hir to kisse hir hande, which she refused, but gentlye kissing him she bad him welcome, farther talke had she, not for the often naming of Rosicleer, brought to hir remembraunce the wrong which shee had done to hym and hir heart was so great that she had no power to speake a woord, but crauing pardon she departed to hir chamber, this seemed straunge to hir father, but bicause hir colour was so pale it was thought to be by reason of sickenesse. When she was within hyr chamber doores she let hir teares flowe at libertie, which before she restrayned for feare of beeinge espyed. And thincking in what manner hir fathers court was honored by Rosicleer, and in what estimation he was holden amonge those Princes and knyghtes, how glad they were of his friendhsip, and howe loth hir father was to lose hym, she burst out into aboundaunce of teares, and wyth the repentaunce of hir former fact, she began in this sort to repente hir rashnesse. Thou hasty and ouer credulous Oliuia what thinge dyd the poore Rosicleer craue of thee but the acceptation of hys seruice, and that thou wouldest become hys Lady, why dyddest thou not receyue him offered especially when so many puissaunt Princes and worthy knyghtes require to haue, and are refused, why wouldest thou not be a Lady ouer him whom the best in the world woulde be seruaunt vnto. Where

was my iudgemente and the eyes of my vnderstanding that I forethought me not of these things, now doe I to much repent that which I hastely willed as touching the bannishment of Rosicleer. Héere shee stayed hir speache, and in great disease of minde, shutte hir selfe in hir closet. Héere now wanted the faythfull counsayle of hir seruant Fidelia for had she bene at hande she mighte haue slaked hir mistresse sorrowe which in the ende grew so farre as besides the losse of speach, and hir often sounding she fel into a hotte burning ague, which left hir not of a greate while, till more comforte came by meanes of an other letter which she redde of hir loues to his mother Briana. Till that ime we wyll helpe the two knights Bargandel and Lyriamandro out of the woode, and bringe them from the search of Rosicleer to the courte of king Oliuerio.¶ The Princes Bargandel & Liriamandro retourning from the forest, misse Rosicleer. Cap. 41.THe great desire which ledde Bargandel and Liriamandro to pursue the knightes of the forest made them to followe on so longe, till they ioyned at a great and well towred Castle, standing at the one ende of the sayde forest. There before these two kinghtes could enter to saue themselues the two Princes had ouertaken them and getting betwéene the Castle and them, they put them to so great scath that the knightes vnable to resist cryed amayn to those which wer within y^e Castle for succour: yet or they could cōe them wer ouerthrown sore woūded, and as the Princes lyghted downe to make dispatch of ten men issued out of the Castle well armed and comming néere layd at the Princes in greate rage, for they wéened their Lordes to haue bene slayne: but this skirmish lasted not long betwéene them for the two Princes were valyant and putting themselues in preace amongste

the thickest in shorte time made riddaunce of the greater part, and those which remayned besought the Princes of pardon, which being easely graunted, the two Princes retourned to the two knightes which had bene felled but late before. These two knightes seing in what case they were, and pitying the destruction of theire people, yeelded themselues to the will of the conquerour, promising that if they might enioy their lyfe and lybertie they woulde amende their folly, and make satisfaction to all gentlewomen, wheroff the Princes were glad & taking their othes for the perfourmance departed in hast towarde Rosicleer as they thought, but he was not where they lefte him, wherefore they sought him out in all parts. This daye till nighte they neuer descended from their horse, at nighte they tooke their bed vnder a tree vntill the comming of the nexte daye, and they were verye pensiue, for that they knew not the cause why he absented himselfe, yet with some hope that the next daye they should heare some newes of him they droue out that night, and on the morrowe mounted vp their horse agayne to finde him out but it was to no boote, for eyght whole dayes they trauayled through the country and hearde no newes of him in the ende thincking they shoulde meet with hym at the court they rode thether in the company of many knights, whether lette them go, whilest wee in the meane time beare the gentlewoman companye which had carryed Oliuias letter vnto Rosicleer.This gentlewoman Fidelia as I told you, perceiuing aswell by the witnesse which his his eyes gaue of his outwarde griefe, as also by the sounde wherein she lefte him, as an argument of his inwarde sorrowe that he neded comforte, and yet not daring shewe him hope contrary to hir Maiesties commaundement strake hir palfraye and without more staye gallopped on hyr waye towards London whether in short time she came: but when she had entred the pallayce shee would not presently make hir 

comming knowen vnto the Princesse, least hir sodayn retourne should worke some alteration, whereby the other gentlewomen might misdeeme of hir arrant. But when she had learned of the gentlewomen that hir Ladye was sicke she well wist whence hir disease sprang, and therefore wisely comming before hir mistresse she yet spared to name Rosicleer till she vnderstoode how well she woulde take his heauinesse.The Princes now vncerteine in iudgement whether to commende of Fidelias faithfulnesse in executing hir deuise, if the letter were delyuered, or to lyke of hir good Fortune if some occasion had hindered the delyuery, being now alone stayed yet to heare eyther yea or nay, as touching the dispatch of hir message. But Fidelia aswell for hir owne compassion ouer Rosicleer as for sorrow to see hir mistresse in that plyghte by hir owne conceite, vttered neuer a worde, but burst out into weeping, whereby the Princesse more troubled then at the first with a féeble voyce spake vnto hir.Tell me Fidelia what thou hast done in thy message, and doubt not but thy trauayle shall well please me, for although the loue I beare him feareth to heare thine aunswere, yet shall myne honour counteruayle the dreade, in which quarrell I will as I tolde thee earst venture my lyfe rather then yéelde my bodye to any opprobry. This saying she lent hir eare vnto Fidelias answere and fastened hir eyes vppon Fidelias lookes, as if no word should haue escaped vnmarked or unaduysed of hir. Fidelias aunswere was short in these termes. For a truthe Madame I had soughte Rosicleer no little time ere I coulde finde him, and as it fell out I founde him when my selfe was not without daunger, as it were to participate of that crueltye towardes him wherein I was partly a dealer: but that which maketh me especiallye to repente my paynes herein, was that my delyuerye was wroughte by him. For at the same time I mette him, sixe knights

outlawes set vppon mée in a forest, and had led me captiue away there to be spoyled of my honour: but that by my outcryes Rosicleer, with two other knights came thether none of them hauing any knowledge of me who I was. There in my presence he killed three of them, the other flying away were followed by the two knightes in Rosicleers company, by which meanes being alone with him, I there delyuered your letters. But I beleue that he had rather haue receiued his deaths wound, then that letter. Ere he opened it, his colour chaunged, and all his body shooke for feare, but after hee had redde the superscription, his eyes were filled with teares, and neuer man was so wo begonne as he: yet he redde it out, and as I remember with the last wordes he gaue a greate grone, and sancke to the earth. Whether he euer recouered or no I wotte not, for I durst not stay with him, therein to fulfill your graces charge which was not to receiue aunswere from him. This vnderstanding the Princesse, and that Fidelia had obeyed euery iotte of hir will so well, although she woulde that hir seruaunt had fayled in some small poynt of diligence in this matter, yet thinckinge to learne more at hir handes she demaunded what thing hée did when shée parted from him and what words hée spake, moreouer what she thought the euent would be. To all which questions, Fidelia aunswered at once, that she left him for deade vppon the grounde, and to deuine was not in hir skill. With this Princesse waxed angry and blamed hir very sore for not abiding the time of his recouery, whereto Fidelia excused hirselfe by hir commaundement but yet bicause the Princesse would haue it so, needs must Fidelia bee thoughte in greate faulte and crime, for not doing so.Now may you gesse that Fidelias trustinesse was lyke a cuppe of colde water to hir hir burning Ague, the more to enrage it, or lyke drincke to a dropsie man whereby his malady the rather encreaseth. For in lyke manner

as Rosicleers heauines came by reading hir letter, so hirs grew by Fidelias report of his heauinesse. And albeit that we heare seldome time of man or woman deade for loue yet it is naturall for ouermuch griefe to abbridge mans dayes, as now it was not loue which so much afflicted the Princesse, but the iniury which she had offered Rosicleer and the griefe which she conceiued by the dispaire of euer seing him, and this griefe had almost wroughte hir vtter bane.¶ Rosicleers departure is published in the court of kyng Oliuerio, Oliuia after knowledge whose sonne he was, reuerseth iudgement pass d by a countermaunde in an other letter, whereoff Fidelia lykewise is the bearer. Cap. 41.THe Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro in the quest of Rosicleer rode farre and nere and could vnderstand any thing as touching him, till that hauing trauailed ouer a great part of that country they mette with people strangers which certefied, that themselues had seene a knyght in y^t sute of armor embarking himself with a gentlewoman and after that a squire sore weping entring into a shippe to followe them, for the which newes Bargandel & Liriamandro were very sorrowfull, and for nowe they were sure that he had forsaken the kingdome, whervpon they agréed to retourne vnto the court, and one daye as the king Oliuerio with the Prince Zoylo and other worthy Princes and knights were gone out of the cittie to solace themselues in the fieldes, these two Princes came towarde the place where the king abode which had beheld them before very héedefully, for they seemed vnto him to be two comly and noble knightes, and therfore he desired to haue a more perfect viewe. But valyant Zoylo knew them by their deuices vppon theire armour, and sayde to

the king and to the other then in presence, that he greatly meruayled why Rosicleer came not with them, for saith he when I parted from them they wer all thrée together, when the king knewe them to be the two Princes, hee caused his trayne to staye till the two Princes came agaynst him, those the embraced with great loue & thancks for theire retourne, demaunding withall for Rosicleer. They which I dare not say knewe the righte cause, but coniected some lykely cause by the strangenes it wrought in him, with greate griefe made a narration of each perticuler as farre as they knewe, both what befell him with in the realme and in what maner he auoyded the realme, as they had heard of others onely in the company of a gentlewoman, and they added moreouer perhaps of their owne heads, perhaps as I sayd before vpon some farther knowledge that it coulde not otherwise be but that he had some great wrong offred vnto him by some person within the realme. The king excusing himsefe to the Princes for his owne dealing towardes Rosicleer became verye sadde and heauy for him, as also those which were néere with him not being able to ghesse of his retourne: and in deede if they had ben certein of his long absence, it would much more haue bene grieuous vnto them, so rare was the loue they all bare to him. But with some little hope of Rosicleers spéedy retourne, the king with those Princes his friends tarryed some dayes in the pallayse, till that bicause he was from them so long, the thrée Princes Bargandel, Liriamandro, and the TartarianZoylo together tooke vpon them to séeke him in which time they aduentured many straunge exployts as shalbe specified hereafter in his historye. But in the ende as the greatest parte of these nobles and Princes stayed in England for the loue of Rosicleer so his presence wanting that court diminished so fast, that in short time there was not behinde remayning in the courte any knight of great account, but the Prince Don Syluerio vnto whome the losse and ab-sence[∗]"sence" in catchphrase only.
of Rosicleer bredde no small contentacion, as it wrought in the king Oliuerio to the contrary no lesser displeasure and disquiet, as if the losse of Prince Edward had againe renued. For ther was no one in his kingdom which could and would aduaunce his priuate credite and the honoure of his countrey by worthy prowesse and by valyant deeds of armes.But when all the kingedome beganne to bewayle the losse of Rosicleer, What did that faire Oliuia which had abandoned him the country, and loued him more then any one in the worlde might she forgette him one instant? No, but when she wayed well that for the accomplishing of hir charge he had forsaken the lande hir good will encreased towardes him, and in stéede of the daylye viewe of his personage, in his absence shee gazed at will vppon the counterfayte and portrature which he had emprinted in hir fancie. This did she the oftener bicause she founde not in hir solitarye contemplation anye other thinge to present it selfe. For amourous thoughtes are euer enemyes to company, andb eing alone, as commonly shee was by reason of sickenesse, what was there to remoue this solytary thought and conuersaunt companion from hir.This companion she styll entertayned, which by use and continuance of time grewe to a setled sentence, and hir loue waxed greater then it was before, and then encreased the flame which burnte more earnestly then euer before it had bene. But as it chaunced, tossing of these things in hir remembraunce, withall she remembred that Arinda had tolde hir howe that Rosicleer had written vnto the Princesse Briana, and as the amorous are accustomed to buylde themselues Castlls of Hope albeyt sometime without foundacion or sure grounde whereon they may surely stande: so hir loue waxed ielous ouer him and she beganne to cast with hir selfe why Rosicleer should write to the Princesse Briana being to hir no kiffe

nor kinne to hir, and so meane borne, out of which in the ende she picked out this hope that out of doubt his birth was a good as his bringing vp. In this matter therfore she laboured Fidelia, secretly to steale that letter from the gentlewoman Arinda hir bedfellowe, and talking about this matter one certeyne time with Fidelia among other things she sayde. Oh my Fidelia as I had the power to bannish Rosicleer: the lande, so woulde I that I coulde bannish him from memory, how profitable had thy counsayle bene then vnto me but what shall I do for that remedy is not more auayleable, since his absence wounds me more then his presence, I graunt thee the sight of the beloued to some encreaseth loue still offering it selfe to be séene, and yet to other some againe the thing dayly seene bringeth lyttle delyght but rather lothsomnesse as contrariwise sometimes loue is moued by discontinuance, and sometimes mens desire encreaseth the flame albeit the beloued appeare not in presence. But this thou takest to be impossible for thou art not touched wiht the lyke passions and none knowes the bitternesse thereoff but the experienced, as appeareth by thée which hast ministred a medicine not of force against my disease. But make me amēds and once agayne venture for my sake, I remēber that Arinda hath a letter of Rosicleers to the Princesse Briana to what purpose I knowe not, but I would gladly sée it, this steale from hir and bring it me that I may reade it, I cannot say what good newes my mind foretelles me by it, but sure I long to reade, as if there were some great secret contayned therein, and quyet shall I not be till I haue had it. Hereto Fidelia replyed briefly that this matter shoulde be lefte vnto hir to watche hir opportunitye, and indéede when Fidelia and Arinda slepte together one night, Fideliaespying Arinda fast on sleepe rose as softly as she might, and taking one of the keyes which Arinda had tyed to hir girdell, therewith she opened the caskette and pulled out Rosicleers letter which she brought to hir

mistresse lodging whom she found waiting for some glad newes. The Princesse hir selfe would not open the letter but gaue it to Fidelia which vnsealed it and read as followeth.To his good Mother the high and mightie Princesse Briana.IF my departure from your presence procureth your iust displeasure, beleeue me madame, and my good mother, your sonne Rosicleer can not be well pelased therewith, foreséeinge the great solitarinesse wherein you remayned, and yet bycause this my iourney hath so prospered with mee, I am the better contented and I beséech your grace to quiet your selfe vpon Gods ordinaunce, from whom I am perswaded this motion in me proceeded. Besides the storye of myne owne good Fortune which Arinda maye safely reporte, I haue heard newes as touching your selfe, the redeliuery of my Father, and the safetie of my brother. For since my departure I haue gotte acquaintaunce with Artemidoro a greate wise man of Greece, perhappes he is not vnknowen vnto you, of whom I haue learned that your husband my father shall ere longe retourne vnto you. That the gentleman of the Sunne my brother is aliue & already knighted, and for prowesse so greatly approued, as not the knightes of elder time are thought matchable, that hée and I shall knowe our Father for the most valiaunt and worthyest Prince on the earth, that we shall haue a pleasaunt ende of our sorrowfull beginninges, whiche God graunt. As touchinge myne owne estate I haue bene brought by thys Artemidoro to the courte of king Oliuerio, where by his owne handes I haue bene dubbed knight, and haue receiued such honour as if I had bene his knowne nephewe, and had it not bene that your grace had commaunded the contrarye, not 
our progency to be knowne, I should for this fauour haue bewraied y^e truth at least to haue giuen him some comfort for the supposed losse of Prince Edward, but I will obey your commaund. And these newes I thought to make you priuie vnto, as not béeing ignoraunt of your heauiuinesse, which I praye God lessen to your comfort. Farther as touching these matters, Arinda may tell you of the specialities. The Almightie send you spedely your desired husband. I take my leaue kissinge your royall handes.Your obedient sonneRosicleer.When Fidelia had ended the letter and the Princesse had well vnderstoode the secretes thereoff, what tongue may expresse the great ioye that entered into hir sorrowfull minde as if shée had but nowe recouered hir lost hope, and had she not nowe counterpaized hir auncient sorrowe with this late spronge ioye hir lyfe had bene in daunger, for in no other thinge excessiue ioye maye doe so much harme as in the hearts of true louers. Amongest whome I can compare these two Prrinces, Rosicleer and the beautifull Oliuia as the chiefest. This Princesse nowe ridde of some part of hir feare, and as it were brought into a newe worlde thought to make amendes by punishing hir selfe for hir cruell letter, thus saith shée. Oh how wel am I worthy of the paines which I nowe sustaine in the repentaunce of my former facte, not onely for that which against Rosicleer I haue committed, but also for the little credit that I haue had of his valorous personage, where were myne eyes & iudgement, when I did not proue his nobilitie by hys vertue, howe great was my pride in that I would in such sorte dispyse so worthy a knyght and bannish him, not onely my presence but thys kingdome also?O inconstant and frayle womankinde for iust cause lightly regarded amonge wise men sith we are lyght in beliefe, light in iudgement, and ouer hastie in shewinge the effect of our conceite: what occasion had Rosicleer gyuen me that I should make exchaunge for the greate good will which I bare vnto hym with so cruell a sentence as to dispatche him from my presence, what had he in his letter any dishonest woorde, any vnlawfull demaunde, or dyd he moue mée to the thinge preiudiciall to my greate estate. This hee desired that I should knowe he loued mée, why shoulde I bee ashamed that my inferiours loue mée, and that hée shoulde lyke of me was the thing I desired. Tell mée Fidelia what is thy counsayle for to amende this faulte, mée thinckes we are in worse case then before. Rosicleer is alreadie departed the countrey, and if I sende to call hym backe hée wyll not regarde mee, or will it not be thought lightnesse, after that I had in suche earnestnesse refused him as it were yesterdaye, this daye sodeinely to alter my purpose, besides that when hee retourneth into thys court, his glorie may encrease to my disworshyppe, and agayne if to beare out my former fact I let the matter passe as it hath done, what shall then become of mée I knowe not howe to liue, he beeing bannished from my presence whom I loue better then my selfe. But Fidelia as thy part was in the first counsaile to bannish Rosicleer, so nowe put to thy helpe that Rosicleer maye retourne agayne without the blemish of mine honour. Very ioyfull was Fidelia to heare the letter, and beeinge well contente that hir mistresse had kepte hir former conclusion in this matter as touching the marriadge of Rosicleer, if his parentage were not so farre inferiour, soberly aunswered.Madame leaue off your complayntes, and be more gladde then euer you were, sith God hath bene so fauourable vnto you as to make Rosicleer of so high estate y^t he

may merite you. For in good sooth I stoode in doubte whether of your paines were the greater, and I knewe no meanes howe to slake them. But sith nowe thys secret is disclosed, the remedy is in our handes, and not so difficult as you make it. For be it that you shall send vnto Rosicleer to demaund pardon of him for the offence which you haue committed against him, shall you thincke you doe your selfe any wronge therein in respect of your princely estate. No, for assuredly he loueth you loyally, & bicause he is of nigh parentage with you, you may therin beguile suspitious eyes, and after his retourne you may bolt it out of him, whether he loue you, yea, or no, if he doe without peraduenture you maye acquite hym, and loue of all thinges woulde be rewarded. I dare warraunt that your loue shall detayne hym with vs, and to thys purpose, madame your hande and my heade whiche ioyntly committed the former facte, shall nowe together make the recantation and crye peccaui. The effect may be onely to will hym to retourne to your presence, and my selfe wyll bée the messenger, and I promyse neuer to retourne into thys countrey tyll suche tyme as I finde hym, and haue deliuered your letter to hys handes. Withall sayth shée this ought presently to bée put in practise, for by the griefe Rosicleer tooke at the sight of your letter, I ghesse that hee is eyther departed thys lyfe or auoided the countrey. The Princesse was very wel content wyth hir hast as the thing which she most desired, and so embraced she Fidelia gladly, and spake vnto hir.Fidelia nowe I knowe the good will which thou hast to serue me, and I confesse that I haue not made thée pryuie to my heauinesse without great hope of comforte at thy handes, therefore I beséeche God once to rewarde thée as I wishe, but bringe me pen, ynke, and paper, for I wil straight way followe thy counsell heerein. Fidelia brought vnto hir pen, ynke, and paper, where-

with the Princess wrought hir reclayme wyth as many sugred woordes as the other letter had sharpe and sower.This letter the sequele wyll shewe vnto you, when we come to the meeting of Fidelia and Rosicleer, but before that time the letter wrytten after thys manner was deliuered vnto Fidelia, and it was agreed vppon betweene themselues that vppon the nexte daye shee shoulde goe to seeke hym. This nyght they tooke theyr rest, the one for the better enduring of hir longe trauayle which she shoulde sustayne, the other to make satisfaction for hir broken sleepes. Ere broade morninge Fidelia was vp, and hauynge conuayed Rosicleers letter where shee founde it, shee went vnto the Princesse to take hyr leaue of hir. When as they were departinge. Oh my good Fidelia, sayde the Princesse, doe as much as thou mayest to retourne agayne speadely, for if thou stayest longe I shall liue but small whyle, there is nothinge that maye so soone shorten and cutte off my dayes as to hope without successe, and to dreade the worst. I tell thée that tyll thy comming agayne my nyghtes well bee tourned to watchinges, & I shal recken the clock hourely awaiting thy presence. O God Fidelia when as the nyght is ouerpassed I wyll make accounte of the daye to come, and I wyll neuer leaue castinge of perilles tyll that I shall heare thee bringe some tidinges of that good knyght. Fidelia was very sorrye to thincke of the cares whiche hyr Ladye was like to receyue, and principally for that shée shoulde leaue hir alone wanting wyth whome to communicate hir payne. Wherewith beeinge somewhat troubled, and also foreseeinge the longe tyme of hyr adsence, so shee departed wepinge in thys manner. Madame it is needelesse for you to charge mee farther in these affayres, the paynes wherin I leaue you are suffici-

ent to hasten my iourney, I woulde to God my Fortune were aunswerable to the desire which I haue to serue you in this matter. But bée of good courage and hope for the cōming of your knight, or else looke not for me, with these they broke off, & Fidelia wente to hir fellowes vnto whome shée tolde that shée would soiourne with hir parentes in the countrey for a season, after goinge to the Sea side, shée entered into a shyppe prepared towardes Almayne, wherein the historie leaueth hir sailing to recount of other things which chaunced in the meane time.¶ Rosicleer was betrayed into the Ilande of Candramarte that Gyant whose handes had bene cutte off before by Rosicleer. Cap. 43.YOu haue hearde howe Rosicleer departed from the great Britaine in the company of the straunge gentlewoman neuer hoping to retourne agayne into that lande, onely for the accomplishinge of the exile wherevnto he was bounde by hys Ladyes appointment. Nowe the Historie saieth that the gentlewoman with whome hée was in the baote was sente by Candramarte whose handes Rosicleer had cutte off before the kinge Oliuerio for Quéene Iulias rich swoorde, and that she was sent vnder colour of a distressed gentlewoman to bringe him to hir Fathers Ilande, there to be auenged of the hurte and shame which hir Father had receiued. This deuice was thought fittest, both for that Rosicleer as a noble knight pittied suche oppressed gentlewomen, and that for other cause then to shewe himselfe Rosicleer coulde not be brought out of Englande. In this Iland Candramarte had two young Gyantes to hys sonnes whome for that purpose hee had

knighted béeing in making no lesse then hymselfe, besides these Candramarte had fortie chosen knyghtes, all which he armed to assault Rosicleer least he shoulde escape them. By this guyle the Ladye Gyantesse daughter vnto Candramarte carryed hym to hir Father Ilande, wherein wythout any farther aduyce hee aduentured hymselfe for very griefe of hearte whiche hee conceyued to sée hymselfe abandoned hys Ladyes presence. But nowe sixe dayes haue they bene on the Sea, at the ende whereoff the winde was so fauourable that they came within kenninge of the Iland, to hys iudgement very stronge, and to the shewe very pleasurable.Thys beeing discoured by the gouernour, the gentlewoman saide that that was the place wherein his parentes and husbande were taken, cryinge and tearinge of hir haire as if the sight of the place had redoubled his sorrowe. Thys made Rosicleer to bée more earnest in hir quarrell and to thincke it longe till hee were landed, whiche his desire beeing acomplished, the gentlewoman ledde hym vp vppon the shoare where Rosicleer viewed at ease the whole sight of the Ilande. In the first entery vppon the lande there were two stronge Castles as two bulwarkes situated vppon a stype rocke as it were a bowe shotte distaunce ouer agaynste the other.Before the Castelles there was greate broade playne shaddowed with great Okes, and when they had come néere vnto these greate Castelles, the gentlewoman poynting to the one Castell sayde to Rosicleer on thys manner. If that Syr knight you will auenge my quarell you muste goe to that Castell which is on the ryght hande, for that if the traytoure knightes Castell whiche hath taken my parentes and husbande as prisoners, and vntill your comminge I wyll staye heere in this little

boate we women are weake harted and fearefull, and aboue all I woulde not come into his power, for then would he for a suretie murther my parents and my husbande, whom now perhappes he entertaineth more gently vpon hope to winne mée. If you wyll, be it so aunswered Rosicleer, for your longe gownes are not fitte to fight withall, and your sexe shall well aunswere the challenge of your cowardise, with this speach Rosicleer departed, and takinge his horse mounted thereon to come to that Castle on the right hande, the gentlewoman toke hir shyppe agayne, and droue from land amayne. By and by Rosicleer hearde the winding of an horne at the one Castle and presently he heard an aunswere at the other Castle, whereby suspecting that this token was giuen of his comming, he tourned his head to see the gentlewoman whome he had left on the shore. The gentlewoman houering about the bancke, nowe sure of hys escape, and strayning hir voyce cryed. Come foorth, come foorth, sonnes of Candramarte for heere is the newe knyght which cut off our Fathers armes. Nowe wyst Rosicleer by this horne and the gentlemwomans outcries that he had bene betrayed, but as one carelesse of his life as quietly as he could he prepared himselfe, which hee certeinly looked for, his prayer was this. Lorde Jesus haue mercy vpon me whom thou so déerely hast bought with thy bloudshed, pardon my sinnes, and receiue mee into thy kingdome, as for my carcase be it as thou haste appointed me, for death cannot betide me in a better time. After this hee stayed not as dismayed, but passinge farther to see in what manner thys treason was compassed, he sawe the gates of the one Castle set wyde open and thence issuinge a huge gyant vpon a myghty courser with more then twentie knyghtes well armed at hys tayle. At their first comminge they made a greate showt as if they had got some great victory, & the gyant amongest the rest sayd vnto hym. Thou miserable and

wretched knight well shalte thus abye the shame which thou diddest to my father Candramarte when thou diddest cutte off hys armes at London. Rosicleer as desperate made aunswere. I doubt not but for all your threats you will giue me leaue to dye, but ere that happen, it may be you shall be disappoynted of your purpose and with that he drewe out Queene Iulias sworde, with the which hee encountred the tall Gyant which came agaynst him with a great speare. The speare hitte Rosicleer on the brest, and in déede were it not for the finesse of the armoure, it had pearced him, but the mettall being such as it was, the Greek made no more for the blowe then if he had bene hitte with some delycate young knight, and before that the Gyant coulde recouer his horse came to fetch the seconde course, Rosicleer gaue him such a blowe with his sworde that he clefte him to the bowelles, the greate Gyant fell deade to the grounde, the bloode issuyng in greate adoundance. Héere the great brag was quayled, when he which came to aduenge an other mans quarrell coulde not warrant his owne safetie.But truthe it is, that those which vnmeasurably doe séeke reuenge, doe oftentimes heape on themselues the greater mischiefe. And what did this tyrannous Candramarte els which placing himselfe at his windowe to beholde the battayle and to make more solace at Rosicleers harme as if the onely report had not bene sufficient, now in steede of his former wrong he founde a greater by the death of his sonnes, but yet thys is the beginning only of his misery, for the valyant knight not fearing deathe at all, in greate choller rushed amonge the other knightes which lykewise assayled him couragiously and had within a while with theire battayle axes hewen his horse in péeces.When he was on foote he layde about him manfullys that in short space the scantlyng of ground in which they fought was couered with brestplates and targettes, and 

as their number lessened and that he had more roome, so his courage encreased and he did them more scath: but well fare his enchaunted armour, which hadde serued to more purpose in defending, then his sworde in offending, or els his courage had tyred before the ende of so daungerous a fray. Now are there fewe alyue, and those eyther striuing for lyfe vpon the grasse, or in weake case vpon foote, readyer to flye then to fight: but presently ther came fresh succours from the other Castle. For the other sonne of Candramarte with more then thirtie knights in great hast came agaynst this good knight not being idelly occupyed among the other knightes. The Gyant for other good morrow gaue the good knight so strong a blow with his battayle axe vppon the headepéece, that had it not bene rather in the headepéece to withstand the blow, then in himselfe to resist the Gyant, Rosicleer had layne braynelesse on the grounde, but all this grieued him not, sauing that the wayghte of the blowe made him kisse the earth, whence yet he starte vp lyghtly, and minding to requite courtesie for courtesie, as hee was purposed at the Gyant there stept in a knight betwéene them, whome Rosicleer deuided to the brest bone, whereat the Gyant and those which behelde him were much abashed, notwithstanding this they beyng many and he weryed he myghte not defende himselfe long from them, especially from the Gyant which only watched opportunitye of aduauntages yet lengthened he the fight by his noble courage a longe time, vntill for very fayntnesse he was fayne to giue back and to gette his shouldes agaynst a wall, from which afterwarde he was driuen by mayne force, and being pursued, he withdrewe himselfe to the Sea euer as he warded one blowe bestowing an other. After hee had gotte the Sea at his backe he waxed bolder and aboue all watched Candramartes sonne, which had hurte him moste especially him he hitte so sure that the bloude gushed oute in thrée or foure places.In the mean while Candramarte viewing the battayle to no great lyking blasphemed heauen and earth, and leuing the windowe ranne to the Sea side, where the battayle was continued, and with a loude voyce hee called on his knights reuilyng them as cowardes and dastaides if one knight might resist them so longe, and aboue all to his sonne he spake thus. Thou vile and dastarde shéeepe how lyke thou art to thy miserable mother, I sweare by heauen and earth, if thou escapest out of this battayle alyue, my cause and thy brothers death vnreuenged, that I will starue thee in the same place where I starued thy mother.The Gyant and his knights thus rayled on for shame and feare gaue a fresh assault vppon the good knighte, so that as he dispatched some, there stepped in newe in their roomes: and euer the battayle was as it were newe to beginne to poore Rosilceer, which draue him to séeke farther succour in the water, and to stande vp to the nauell, thincking his death to be very nighe, he prayed to God with all his heart for his soules health as one that altogether detested his lyfe, and determined no longer to defende himselfe then the water woulde giue him leaue. Then taketh he his sworde with both his hands and layeth on so thicke that there are slayne more then tenne knightes ere hee leaueth, as the Sea gaue witnes which made the bancke séeme as all bedewed with bloude. Nowe beholde and sée how God neuer forsaketh his, and especially those which abide his pleasure: as hee did vnto this knight, which now standing equally betwixt lyfe and death, though neither fearing the one nor hoping the other, and sure of neyther yet hath he remedy besides his hope and is comforted, of his owne brother, vnknowen to both.So maye Fortune sometyme vexe and annoye vs: yet at the lengthe she retourneth backe and relenteth agayne. But for this matter which wee entreate off, wee are to

rememeber our selues of that valyaunt Grecian sonne to the Emperour Trebatio lefte in the lyttle boate saylinge through the Occean Seas with the which he had passed the bounds of Africa and coasting by the Mediterraneum Seas was driuen along the Spanish shoare, and from thence at length sayled by the Ilande of Candramarte at suche time as Rosicleer nowe enforced himselfe to abide the vttermost of y^e skirmish, with resolute mynd presently to receiue the death or to be conquerour. But this boat guyded by a wiseman as you hearde before toke landing almost agaynst Donzel del Febos will about a birdebolde shotte from Rosicleer where he espyed a cruell fight, but that which most amazed him was y^t one knight (thoughe strong timbred and valyant) yet had sette himselfe against so many, & with their bodyes had made so great a slaughter. So with a great admiration rather amorous then ielous he sayd vnto himselfe. Who woulde beleue that in our dayes there might be founde a knighte furnished with suche excellencie of manhoode. Assuredlye his fame is as worthy to be spoken off, as that Greekes which had killed the famous TroyanHector. Thanckes be to the Gods which haue broughte mee hether, for althoughe I shoulde lose my lyfe, I wyll not leaue hym vnsuccoured.Thus saying hee waded in the water to come néere him, and seeing the Gyant to oppresse him so much and without a shielde, for hee had lost it in battayle with the first Gyant he tooke his sworde with both his handes, and lette driue with all his force at the Gyants heade that he cleaued it vnto the brayne and afterward rushed among the rest killyng many of them. When Rosicleer sawe with one blowe the Gyant stroken downe and suche vnhoped for succours the greate wonder that he receiued may not be tolde. And as if the enterprise had bene achieued or his lyfe saued, with a fresh courage hee wente out of the water, and valyauntly thruste himselfe among

his enemies, where he well gaue them to vnderstand that he was desirous the battayle shoulde ende. Heere two bretheren albeit vnknowen each to others, gaue brotherly helpe in time of néede. And there was neuer a one lefte, which eyther cryed not pardon, or fledde his waye,the supplyants were pardoned. But lette vs thincke of Candramarte which now sawe his other and onely sonne slayne at one blowe, in what plyght doe you iudge him to be: but the worst is good inough, whereas if he had helde in his hungry desire to reuenge with a long delay, or had dissimuled his choller he might haue lyued quyetly wyth his sonnes by him, able sufficiently to defend forreyne inuasion, and mayntayne his. But now childlesse, knightlesse, and armelesse, besides at the mercye of his enemye, he was farre out of charity with all the worlde, that cursing heauen and earth and what was in them, he runne headlong into the sea and there drowning himselfe among the waues, and bequeathing his soule to the Diuill who long ere that expected to be his executor.Tell me I pray you gentill readers, howe often you haue séene the vnmeasurable desire of reuenge haue a lucky ende, or not rather to procure a farther harme, when as that which might be pardoned or dissimuled with honoure afterwarde is bewayled with sorrowe and griefe. It is writtenne that hee that séeketh reuendge, vengeance will lyght on him. For why the same God saythe. To me vengeance belongeth, and I will rewarde it. O ye malicious and wicked me which with infinit trauaile beate your heades to ordayne mischiefe for the least displeasure. Take this lesson for your amendmemt, and make Candramarte your example.But lette vs continue our history of the two brethren the Knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer which now the battayle being ended and the misdoers pardoned had little leysure to learne of eache other who he was. Rosicleer pulled off his visoure, and spake so the Knighte of the

Sunne saying. Knight the most valyant that euer I met withall, I knowe not how to reward you for the greate friendship you haue shewed to me, but tell me your name I praye you and I shall account my selfe the happiest man this day lyuing, and while I lyue will I remember your valour. The Knighte of the Sunne noting the greate slaughter of knights with y^e manglyng of armour in that place wher y^e first batattayle had bene fought, besides the monstrous blow wherewith the firste Gyaunt had béene slayne, and after viewing his personage, his bearde but now burgening he pulled of his helmet and after the manifesting of his beautifull lookes suche as passed all the knightes of his time he aunswered gently. Right valyant knighte, I am to thancke my Gods for that they haue brought me hether in so good a time as to know so valyant a knight, and to see with mine eyes the knighthoode which I would scarce haue credited with mine eares: but whereas you demaunde of me who I am, know you that I am called the Knight of the Sunne for the deuise which I beare in my armour, and for my birth I can shew you no farther neither know I more of my estate: but the aduenture which brought me hether hath bene by occasion of a storme which draue me on this shoare, and this is the firste lande whereon I sette foote since this tempest tooke my ship, and courtesie commaunded me to lend mine aide when I saw you ouermatched with number. And thus much for aunswere to your demaunde: but now agayne that I haue tolde you that which you required, so I pray you tell me your name, and for what cause this cruell battayle hath bene foughte betwéene these Gyants and you. While the Knight of the Sunne spake thus, Rosicleer beheld him very sadly, and hearing him say that he was the Knight of the Sunne and that he knew no more of hys estate, he thought that peraduenture this same might be his brother of whome Artemidoro had tolde him suche meruayles, but leauing this suspicion til he might questi-

on of it more at large, he satisfied the Knight of the Sun as to his question in shorte speache after this manner. Your friendeshippe was great, and so I make reckning of it, otherwise I should not haue happened on so good a time to tell you my name in which biscause you woulde learne of mée, you shall vnderstande that my name is Rosicleer, and that I was of good report in the court of kyng Oliuerio the king of great Britaine although my mishap causing it I doubt mee so much that my name is once mentioned amongest them, but that matter I will leaue off as not pertinent, this which you require aboute our fight sprong vppon thys occasion, and so hee shewed the whole order both of the receiuing of his Auant Cheualier at the kyngs hands: the first dayes iusting: the second dayes combatte with Candramarte: the honoure of the iustes: the enuye of Candramarte: and poynt by poynte the whole story as you hearde before.Which tale Rosicleer had scarsely finished, when the gentlewoman which all this whyle remayned in the ship cryed out, wherat they tourning their heads, saw in what manner she outraged saying. O spightfull Fortune doe what thou canst, for the succour which I haue wanted on lande, I hope to finde in the bottome of the Seas, and the God Neptune which hath power ouer the swelling waues shall kéepe mee from farther vengeaunce, wherewith she leaped into the Sea, but being clad in large garmets she coulde not drowne presently. The Knight of the Sunne and Rosicleer seeing hir in that estate, pitied hir greatly, but she was too far off for them to wade néere, so the Knight of the Sunne tooke his boat hastely to helpe y^e gentlewoman wher otherwise then he looked for, y^e boat was carryed by vyolence an other waye, and albeit hee stroue to bringe it towardes hir, yet preuayled hee nothing, for it sailed in y^e Sea as swiftely as sometimes the cloudes racke in the ayre being driuen by the windes, presently Rosicleer with greate griefe loste the sighte of the

boate, wherfore fetching a déepe sighe, as for that his former hope was cleane dashed to haue founde his brother, he sayd as followeth. Fortune, the thing which I moste detest, therein thou showest thy selfe most fauourable vnto me. This is my lyfe which now twise thou hast restored me without my wish, but that which my heart most desired and with which my lyfe shoulde finde most ease, therein thou sheweste thy selfe an aduersary to me: so that whatsoeuer good happeneth vnto me, thou makest mee thincke that it happeneth for the worste, for the longer I lyue, the more are my paynes encreased.Now by that time that he had lamented a while for this sodayne losse of the straunge knight, he saw the gentlewoman cast vppon the sandes not as yet deade, whom he caused those knightes which were escaped in the battayle to carrye vnto the Castell, and there to finde some remedy for hir. Thus the knights did, with whome hee wente to one of the Castelles, where for this time wee wyll leaue him, to followe the Knighte of the Sunne on his iourney by Sea.¶ The Knight of the Sunne was carryed to the Ilande of Lyndaraza, where he achieued manye straunge and fearefull aduentures. Cap. 44.WIth great swiftenesse and incredible haste the boate whereas the knyght sayled, was carryed, passing in shorte time the déepe Atlantike and the West Occean, néere the vttermost Cape of y^e Ponent, till from thence it droue vppon the Pillours of Hercules, where his mightie arme and stéeled forke made place for the Occean to enter and water the earthe. This Sea is called Mediterianeum Sea, and into this Sea the Knighte of the Sunne shoued his boate, where he found well peopled townes and greater delyght then appeared in the wide and West Occean,

and he beganne to receiue some ioy of his hether arryuall as if not without cause he were carryed in such hast, and that some great thing was therby hoped for: but as sory for his sodayne acquayntaunce with Rosicleer he beséeched his gods with all his hearte, that they myghte once méete agayne, and at more leysure recount each to other of their aduentures.Well on all griefes whether for his friendes Brandyzel and Clauergudo, or this vnacquaynted Rosicleer, or the vnskilfulnesse of his way were extinguished, by that his lerned gouernour guided their Barke whether it was conuenient. So still hoping for the Porte and Hauen, wherein his little boate shoulde ryde, he sayled as I sayd in the middell earthe Sea, where on the lefte hande hee sawe Spayne, Portugall and those countryes where hee coulde gladly haue bestowed himselfe, but that he was not to commaunde the stéereseman, but in good time came hee thether as shalbe recyted in the history héereafter. Although by shoare on the right hande he lefte Africke, Carthage, and Tures, and forewarde as he sayled he discouered the Ilandes Belears and Sardinia, with the warlyke Italy, and the fertill Sicily where the flames of Aetna hill a while stayed him. There might hee sée the ruynous reliques of the olde Syracuse, and many perillous Mermaydes, haunting those shoares much feared by all the Maryners Then sawe he the fresh water of the ryuer Nylus, which entreth the Sea by seauen mouthes. From thence one the other hande might hée sée Greece. Wherewith hee woulde more wilingly haue fedde his eyes, if he had then knowne the ryghte which he had thereto. But from thence hee lawnched into the broade Euxino where the wide Sea conuayed all thinges out of sighte, that nought appeared but cloudes aboue and waues beneath. Longe thus he sayled meruaylinge when his nauigation should take ende.After this as it were a faire calme following a stormy

tempest ther appeared aboue the water a faire Ilande vnto the which his boat draue, whereat he was merry and pleasaunt thinking that there abode him some aduenture wherein he might try his manly prowesse, and full fayne hee was to leaue the Sea: héere I say at this Ilande his Barke stayed, whereby he knewe that his iourney was thetherwarde.Then the knighte leaped to lande, vppon the entrye whereoff there was a banke cast of hard stone, and somewhat farther he sawe a freshe and pleasuant soyle full of the swéetest hearbes that euer he had séene. There was a fence or closure made of tall high trées, some of them with so loftye toppes that it weryed him for to looke vpwardes. Beneath this there was a meddowe platte whereon grewe many flowers and hearbes of all sortes, and it was compassed with a stil water gently rollyng vppon the pummise stones, the water was as cléere as any Christall.Among the thicke trées he might haue séene the swifte Harte and the faire Unicorne with the lyttle Beuerelte and the small Connye bancking the gréene boughs, beside the lyght Squirel climbing the tall Oke, with the swéete chirping layes, which the Birdes made, recording so pleasauntlye amonge the tender sprayes that it would haue made a man vtterly forelorne to receiue comfort, and hee that was surprised with loue or loues dartes might haue founde a more present remedy then the Hartes of Creete doe when they are wounded by the Hunter. This pleasure to haue enioyed, you woulde haue thoughte your selfe to haue bene transported into an other worlde or into a celestiall Paradise.When the Knight of the Sunne had both beheld and hearde all those thinges, he immagined presently that the Iland was well stored with people thether resorting for the delyght there to be founde, but yet he meruayled why their pathes were no more trodden, and gazing one

euery part which waye to take beste, he tooke the waye which was most beaten, therein he walked heauily laden with his armour: but his desire to know the end of thys aduenture, and the sweete melody of the Birdes continually accompanying him, made him thincke his iourneye shorter.About a myle or more out of this medowe he entred into a playne pasture so besette with flowers as the medowes were. In the middell of this pasture as it were a bowe shotte from him he sawe the fairest Castell which euer eye had séene aswell for the height and largenes as for cost and workemanship.The matter was all of Jasper which when the Sunne beganne to cast his beames thereon shyned so bright that it dazeled the eyes of the beholder. The forme was quadrangle after an euen proportion as broad as long. In euery of the corners ther were ten faire Turrets which reached by mans séeming to the cloudes. The outward wall of the Castle was harde Marble hewed out of the Ilande Paros, rounde aboute the Castell there was a déepe ditche with a deuyce, that albeit there was no springe in it to nourish it, yet was it mayntayned with a freshe flowe partly by the fall of waters from the mountaynes, partly by the ryuers we named amongest the meddowes, which at euery spring cléered the channell. Vppon this water there stode a bridge with thrée strong Turrets one in the beginning, the other in the middest, the other in the ende towards the Castle. Through them a man cannot enter but by playne force, for the keepers open not but constrayned and they néede to be right valyant for the porters are fell.The Knight of the Sunne gazed vppon this verye attentiulye, so amased at the straungenesse of the worke that hée coulde not thincke it to haue bene buylded by mans hande. And hauing as then no other skill of God, but the Gentiles lawe, he thought that peraduenture this

might be the house of his Gods, when they descended frō heauen to soiourne amongest vs. So very desirous to know the ende thereoff, he came vnto the bridge where he stayed a while ere he procéeded farther, for he iudged that according to the great strength of the archers, the depth of the water and the height of the wall, that no man might enter without leaue asked. And as he there wanted not matter or meruayle for the wonder of the castle, so meruayled hée that néere so rare & mangificent buildings he met no person of whom he might demaunde to whom the fayre Castle did belong. Amid these thoughts it seemed best in his fancie to call to them within, if perhaps any would aunswere him, and therefore comming to the gates of the first turret which was then néerest to him he found a porch opened, and right before a faire stately court enclosed with walles of Jasper, and in the midst before him a payer of stayers of a x. or xij. degrées which ledde vp to a fayre piller, wherevnto was fastened with a chaine of golde, a fayre horne and a rich brawdricke to it. The horne was tipped all with golde, and in the ende were set many precious stones. The riches thereoff might haue contented a right couetous eye: vnderneth the horne vppon the same piller there were engrauen letters which the knight of the Sunne perceiuing and hoping there to learne some more newes he mounted vp the stayres and read as héereafter followeth.¶ This Castle belongeth to the beautifull Lindaraza, the gates may not be opened to any saue to him which windeth the horne. But let him take heede withall, for when they are open there shall not faile him cruell & fierce porters to giue him the death if it bee possible.When he had reade the letters and gathered by them that there were Porters to aunswere him, hee feared not a whit for all the threates of y^e writing, but wyth an heroycall heart he vntyed his horne and winded it so shrill that all the Castel Eccowed wyth the noyse, at the sounde heereoff the inner gates of steele flewe open as if they had bene shaken with a tempest, and presently there appeared a fierce Gyant bearinge in the one hande a barre of yron, and in the other a chayne wherein hee ledde tyed a Dragon the most hydious that euer man looked on. This beast was from the breast downeward as high as any man on horsebacke, and the tayle theroff was tenne paces in length, wherewyth he sweeped the grounde. Nowe the stronge Gyant comminge out of the gates let loose the Dragon and tooke the barre of yron in his handes paceing towardes the knight whiche was nowe in descending from the piller. Ere the knyght could easely come to the grounde the Gyant mette hym with a counterbuffe on the sheelde that he missed two or thrée steppes in comminge downe. The monsterous Dragon beneath was ready to receiue him. But the nephewe of Alicante lightly estéemed all thus, and rather tooke courage in thys that there was some thinge worthy his paynes behinde when the Castell was kept by suche ougly porters, and drawinge out his swoorde hee stroke at the Serpent a blowe on the toppe of the head, but it dyd hym no more harme then if it had lyghted vppon a smythes anstelde, but it a little benummed his sences and beguyled him of his forehoped grype. Thys little harme which he had done to the Serpent dyd much amaze hym, and the better to saue hymselfe from the Serpente he got vnder the piller, and then hee bestowed an other blowe vppon the Serpents head with all his force. The Serpent so sore stricken waxed woode and brayed out so loude that all the courte range of the noyse, and faine would it haue got betweene the knight

of the Sunne, & the place vnder he piller where he stoode to haue raught him in his pawes, but the good knight defended himselfe lightly from him and laide at the Dragon still with the swoord. The Gyant abode still at the stayers foote to waite for the knightes tombling on the stayers, at length he came downe headlong where the strong Gyant let driue at him so great a blowe with his barre that the barre burst and the good knight thought his head had bene brused, with this as well as he might, he rose vp, and driuing at the gyant he cut his legges cleane from his body. The Gyant falling to grounde, the Serpent raysing his tayle grasped at the knight of the Sunne, but I can not tell howe the knight escaped it, and withal he tooke vp the greatest péece of the barre of yron which the Gyant had, and hasting towarde the Serpent he gaue him such a blowe therewith vpon the head that hée fell downe, and before he could rise, the knight gaue him such an other that his scull as hard as flinte burst into two péeces, yet for al this y^e great Serpent was not throughly dead but bounded vp into the ayre, and swept the ground with his tayle seeming to be more fierce then at the beginning. The knight of the Sunne purposed to strike no more but quickly gate vp higher on the stayers to be out of daunger, in the ende the Dragon sturred nor more whereby he iudged that he was dead, and meruaylinge what besides this there might be found in the Castle, he hong the fayre horne about his necke, and with the bar in this hands he entered the first Tower, and from thence through the first arche of the bridge till he came to the second Tower which was the midst of the bridge, the gates whereoff were of steele & shut as fast as y^e gates of y^e first arch were. Cheualiero del Febo winded his horne and presently the gates were opened and there came issuing out a Gyant no lesse strong then the first, hauing in the one hand a clubbe, and in the other a chayne wherein he ledde a Lyon, the wightyest of lymme and byggest

of bone that euer man sawe. The bodye as bigge as a Bull, and euery of his clawes was a handfull longe, his eyes shined lyke lampes.This Lyon the Gyant untyed strayght and sette vppon the knight, which with no litte courage as he had a greater quest in hande awayted him, and at the firste blowe hee strake him so fell vppon the heade, that the braynes starte out, and the monsterous Lyon fell strarke deade without more sturring. When he had this done he encountred the Gyant, and the Gyant lette dryue at him: But the knight now minded at that time to assaye or put his trust to the fine mettall of his enchaunted helmette starte aside, that the clubbe fell vppon the brydge: but before the Gyant coulde reare his clubbe, the sonne of Trebatio hitte him so stronglye beneathe the knées that hys shinne bones were burst withall, and the Gyant wyth greate clamoures fell downe, the Knighte of the Sunne leauing him sure inough for making resistance tooke vp his heauye clubbe to go farther and to sée what was within.This passed he through the seconde tower, till hee came to the thirde and last tower of the bridge, whereoff finding the gates shut as the other he wynded his horne, and with the shrylnesse thereoff the gates burst open making as great a noyse as if the bridge had rente in two presently stepped foorth a huge Gyant, nine foote in height all his bodye couered with a toughe hide so harde and strong that no sworde coulde enter at his wast he hadde a sword, and in his hand a chayne of yron whereto were fastened two Tygers of wonderfull greatnesse, by the fiercenesse of theire lookes able for to haue affrayed anye man.For all this the hardy Grecian was nothing appalled, for he lyfte vp the heauy club so stronge, as if the greate Hercules shoulde haue come to fighte with him onelye with the showe it mighte haue made hym to tremble.

Those fierce beastes so soone as the Gyant had vnlosed them, opening their horrible mouthes, ranne with suche swiftnesse vpon him that it seemed their feete touched not the ground, at such time as they came both vppon him, he gaue one of them such a blowe vpon the shoulder that he burst all hys bones in peeces wherewith the Tyger fell to the grounde. Then came the other and caught holde of him in the shoulder so griping him that he coulde not stirre his arme, neither one way nor other, and grasping almost all the headpeece within his sharpe teeth he thougt to haue crushed it in peeces, but the helmet defended the head and the Magicke armour kepte of the tearinge of his nayles. Nowe the good knyght seeing neither purpose of hys clubbe nor vse of his swoord while he was thus entertayned by the Tyger throwinge away his clubbe, he strugled and wrastled so longe with the Tyger, that in the ende he cast the beast vppon the harde flinte stones with such a fall that the braynes flew out of the head. The wylde Gyant when he sawe the Tyger thus slayne, wiht an hellishe furye he went toward the knight of the Sunne, and takinge his longe swoorde he gaue him such a blowe vppon the toppe of the helmet that there sparckeled out great flakes of fire, and the knight fell vppon handes and knees. But as soone as he coulde, the knight recouering his swoorde requited him so couragiously, the Gyaunt beeinge vnarmed, that had not the stronge hide stoode him in steede of complete armour the swoorde had entered the fleshe, whereoff at this time it missed. Heereat the wilde Gyant taking vp agayne the heauie swoord stroke the knight of the Sunne vpon the toppe of hys headpeece, but he auoided the blow lightly. In such sort y^t the heauy swoord fel vpon y^e ground & brake in peeces, the hilte onely remaining in his hands. Now before y^e gyant could raise vp his swoord y^e knight of the Sunne had accōplished thus much of his purpose, he thought

there had bene no more to be done saue now to know the secrets which abode behinde, and wherefore this strayght warding was ordayned. Therefore he went throughe all the bridge vntill he came to a pathway which ledde betwéene the outwarde wall and the great Castle. When he had walked this path, about a bowe shotte off he saw a lyttle dore all engrauen with sundry kynde of portrayture, the straungenesse whereoff, with the varietie of the story wherein portrayed, might haue helde a good caruer a long time: the Imagery was so drawn that it would haue troubled the witte of Praxites to haue matched it. The gates were not great, but the chiefe part was of stéele as surely closed as the first.The Knight of the Sunne thinking that percase they woulde open at the first push rushed against them with all his force but his laboure was lost and hee preuayled no more then if hee woulde haue broken downe the walles with his féete. Therefore he winded his horne whereat the gates burst open but no man appeared without, saue that when he was about to enter he sawe two Gyantes the one of the one side and the other armed from top toe, with headepéeces of fine stéele, and their armoure a finger déepe in thickenesse they helde in their hands two battayle axes raysed vp aloft ready to discharge their blows vppon the commer in. The fiercenesse of their semblance was so straunge that it is harde to belieue that any man had the courage to enter a gaynst his will, but if it hadde bene the dogge Cerberus he could not haue defended the passage.This valyant knyght seing them in such sort prepared for the fight albeit he wanted not courage to assaye that fearefull entry, yet he stayed in doubte howe he mighte enter without daunger and warde the two first blowes. For to receiue both their blowes at once was not possible without great hazarde, and otherwise enter he could not, but after long pawsing he came nerer and as if he would

haue passed through he shewed himselfe, whereat the Gyants as if he had entred indéed let driue their blowes, the whilest the Knight stepte in betwéene them, and taking the nexte to hand he hit the one Gyant ouerthwart the pawnch, but his sworde entred not. The Gyantes which at their first blowes had broken their heauy clubs drewe out their broade arminge swordes, and layde at the Knight of the Sunne. The one hee receiued on the sworde, the other hee auoyded lyghtely by stepping aside. And willyng to see the ende of the aduenture he stroke on of them full vppon the visour wherewith he had thought to haue hewed his face, but he was deceiued, for it dyd the Gyant no more harme then if he hadde bene smitten with an hasill wande.The Gyants nowe layde on loade, but he disappoynred them by y^e delyuernes of his body. And now consider what thought this good knight was in to féele himselfe assayled by two fierce enemyes & not able to hurt againe. Neither was it possible to maister one of them by wrastlyng, for both the weaker of the two was to strong for him, and perhappes while he shoulde deale with the one, the other might displease him. So that neither of these wayes were conuenient, without some present helpe the daunger certeyne, yet in the ende he beganne to rebuke himselfe, euer sayng, Sticke to it, thou cowarde, and albeit as yet it séemes impossble for to escape this perillous skirmish, yet stirre not thy foote, either shalte thou soone ouercome or soone loose the victory, but neuer shalte thou lose thy infamy if thou dye flying, many times such hard aduentures haue bene occasion of greater glorye, and if any body but my selfe achieue it, I shall not lyke my self as long as I lyue,So gazing about to séeke aduauntages he marked the wickette standing open somewhat beneath the Porche where through he mighte well passe by lyttle boweynge himselfe, but neyther of the Gyantes mighte except they 

fell on all foure, for they were higher then he by the brest downewarde, when he sawe this dore he bethought him selfe how to be out from the daunger of blowes which fell into his brayne at a time of néede. Thus it was as the Gyants were desirous to hitte him he euer stouped vnder and watchinge one of them, as hee was lyfting vp his armes, before the blowe could descende he ran and closed with him, and taking him by the gyrdell carryed him by strong hande and with all his force ranne agaynst the wickette that the Gyant not being able to passe through burst both heade and shoulders agaynst the wall, the Gyant there dyed in hys armour.This done the strong knight passed farther, and letting the body fall with so muche spéede as hee might hee ranne to méete with the other Gyant, which then approched with his sworde in both his handes to haue smitten him. But these Gyants lyttle acquaynted with feates of armes, and the Knight of the Sunne by the dexterytye of his body defended himselfe lyghtly from them and obtayned victory.For when the Gyant had lette his sworde fall out of his handes he embraced the Gyant with both his hands and tourning himselfe twice about at the thirde time hée lette him fall that through the wayghte of his body hys gall burst in his bodye, and he dyed presently. This meruaylous combat béeing ended, the good knight was now wery: and therefore tooke his ease vppon a seate of stone which was in the porch there to occupy himselfe he behelde the strong buyldings of the Castle. After roominge about to finde some other way to departe thence he found at one ende an other gate all of yron and the gates shutte as all the first, whereby he sawe that he had yet father tryall to abide.And therefore he rested him selfe where he sate, after which done he arose and passing through the first wall to the seconde hee founde the gates shutte, and therefore

he winded his horne, presently the steele gates opened, and there came  thereoff a flame of fire accompanyed with great smoke as if it had bene some place of hell, vntill the smoke vanished awaye he could see nothing. After hée saw before y^e gate a beast in forme lyke a Crocodile but somewhat more hydeous, as it wer a mishapen monster purposed by nature to show the lothsomenesse of deformity. Out of his mouth he sent great flakes of fire, in the fangs ther sate a tuse without the mouth about halfe a yearde very sharpe and cutting.The good knighte abashed nowe to sée so many fierce kéepers in that Castle as if it had ben nothing but a lodge of warders, (as he supposed) to kéepe in durance the sons of Titan which once rebelled against Iupiter. The which tale he had often heard in his Gentiles lawe, and yet the trauayle of conquering grieued him not alyke to the long looking for of the end but not minding to debate y^e matter at this time, he tooke his sworde in hys hande, assayinge the entry, but the ougly beast cast out suche a flash of fire that the Knighte of the Sunne lyttle lyked of it. And not being able to endure it, he gaue backe tyll the heat should slake.This may a man say that it troubled the knight more then all that had passed, one cause was for the extremitye of heate, an other for that he sawe no waye to come nere the beast, for before he might approch it the beast woulde be all on a lyghte fire, but remembring himselfe of the club which he had lefte in the first entrye and thinking that it shoulde be the best weapon he might haue he ran to fetch it, and retourning spéedelye he founde the monster as you hearde before spitting his fire. The Knight of the Sunne with his long reach in his hand gaue the beast vppon the foreheade such a blowe, that the heade rent into two, and the terrible beast fell to grounde, beating his feet against the grounde so harde that it séemeed the Castle shooke with all, and the smoke which it sent foorth, as at the quenching

of a great fire so blinded the Knighte of the Sunne till it was starke dead that hee might not enter: from thence after he came to a faire courte the sumptuous buyldinge whereoff amazed him much, that in comparison the golden statues which Nero the Emperour of Rome erected might not more delyght him: no, nor yet the wonders of the worlde the stately Pyramides of Aegypt, wherein only their kings are buryed, and wherein they wasted the most part of their substance might lyke delyght them. In beholding the straungenesse of these buyldings I can not tell precisely his thought for euery circumstaunce, but if his thought were as my thought, or if the report be true which first came from him, surely ther was mater inough to gaze vppon, but what thincke you he noted especially? Nothing but a marble stone, but as it fell out to some good purpose.In the marble stone were engrauen the valyant actes of all knights alyue or dead in such order of time as they lyued. First the auncienter, then the later, till he came to the néerest very fewe or none omitted. A rare péece of worke, and must néedes haue bene done by other cunning then story or caruing, for the one the paynes were infinite, for the other no mans reading stretcheth so farre as to knowe euery story. But héerein he tooke great pleasure, and from the first to the last he ranne them ouer, he stayed at his owne picture wherevnto ioyned nexte aboue was Trabatio, and the nexte beneath was Rosicleer These thrée pictures were fresher to his fancie then the others, as if they had bene newe made. Remembring by the picture of Rosicleer the countenance of that knight whome he had founde in the Iland of Candramarte, hee yéelded foorth a great sigh and blessing the picture from the bottome of his heart, he spake hese words vnto like purpose.Thou art a ryghte good knyght and worthely place among the most famous knights of the world, for I be-
léeue[∗]word illegible, supplied from catchphrase.  not that among so many as are here painted ther is  so valyant as thou art. For albeit commonlye wee make much of our Elders vertues, it is but as commonly many things shew faier a far off whereas when they come to tryall they are but as ordinary.After this hee mused in himselfe who that Trebatio might be for he neuer hearde of such a man: but by the draught of the picture he tooke him to be a comlye personage, of a milde and sadde countenaunce and it did him good to beholde him: so looking farther he saw the whole story of the Emperour Trabatio drawen vnderneathe, from his first landing in Hungary till that houre of hys enchauntment in that Castle. Nowe he was in the company of Lyndaraza without knowledge of himselfe, or witting to his friendes. Now did he at length learne the purpose of the strong wardes which was to holde in the Emperour Trebatio there beitched for the companye of Lyndaraza, whome before he could restore to the knoweledge of himselfe, he must bringe from that péece of the Castell which was enchaunted to that onely effect. This when he vnderstoode it pitied him much that so good an Emperour shoulde there by in holde by false meanes to the great sorowe of his subiects and principally of his wife the Princesse Briana whome he sawe lykewise all cladde in balcke lyke a widdow, and to worke some meanes of his deliuery, he looked about him which way was best to take, and lyking best one of the galloryes the which was néerest to the paued courte, that he followed mownting vp a paire of stayrs all made of Jasper in the midst wheroff he mette comming downe a bigge knight armed with rich and glistering armoure, his face bare and of a fresh colour, which approching to him drewe out his sworde, and without saying oughte, layde at the Knighte of the Sunne as fiercely as he could.The knight of the Sunne woulde rather haue talked with him to haue learned some newes but it could not

be, so it behoued him to drawe his sworde and to defend himselfe. There beganne a whotte skirmishe that the clattering of their armoure and the flashinge of theire swordes range throughout the pallayce, This fury notwithstanding lasted not longe for the Knight of the Sun in a cholericke rage hitte his aduersary so sure vppon the toppe of his helmette that the bigge knighte fell downe and laye for dead.The knighte of the Sunne stayed not to make dispatch of hym but rather hauing compassion on him (for he séemed a noble knight) he vnlaced the knights helmet to giue him ayre, but not being able then to recouer him, he passed farther and comming to the gallorye hee then went vp an other payre of stayres so wide and broad that if two were goyng vp néere the two endes, scarcelye the the one might knowe the other. Nowe in this his way albeit many things were which might haue stayed either as idell gazer or a curious eye, and manye thinges beside to haue inuited a weryed man to take his rest, yet the desire of finding the Emperour carryed his féete, and overcomming the paynes of the waye he came to a portall curiously wrought, to the entrye wheroff, there led thrée steps of beaten siluer. By them he entred into the great chamber where first Emperour Trebatio had a sighte of the faire and beautifull Lyndaraza and was bereaued of his wittes.In this chamber he was greatly abashed at the coste and workemanshippe of riche Tapestrye and other ornaments, and euer though the stuffe were of the costlyest, yet the workemanship bettered the matter. Hence must he as I tolde you conuaye the Emperour if hee meane to make himselfe known. Now for your farther instruction knowe that among other things which the wise Lyrgandeo gaue vnto the Knighte of the Sunne, at hys departure from Babilon, hee gaue him a lyttle stone sette in a ryng of excellent fine golde the same being of so straunge

vertue that no enchauntment might preuayle agaynst it, by this he was bolde to enter the chamber, & being within was frée the charme. Out of this chamber he came to the Orcharde wherevnto this chamber looked, so fresh and delectable that if euer pleasure might rauish the sences of man, a man might affirme it of that place. In the arbour neere the entry he sawe a number of faire gentlewomen clothed with silke, their breasts bare and white as snowe, some played on instrumentes and other sange swéetly to them.Such kinde of Mermaydes woulde haue beguyled a well stayed Vlysses, or such Musicions aswell for theire cunning song as their company, woulde haue broughte a watchefull Argus to a sléepy heade. A good way off he sawe the Emperour Trebatio and the faire Lyndaraza alone, sette in seuerall chaires all vnmindefull of other thinges but of their loue and wish to other. The Emperour Trebatio leaned his heade vppon the white and delycate breastes of Lyndaraza with suche shewe of pleasure therein that the young Greke féelyng thereby in himselfe that which all men haue, coulde haue bene content wyth the others roome, and for very loue he made an inuectiue agaynst nature which hadde ordayned that kinde to haue such souereintye ouer valuant knights, with many words to the same matter, but this was yet the wantonnesse of his immagination, his necke had not felte the yoke, hereafter perhappes he will speake more earnestly when you shall beléeue him.Nowe, when the gentlewomen espyed him as all abashed they layde aside their Musicke, with the soddayne staye whereoff Trebatio and Lyndaraza lyfted vp theire heades and séeing a knight so strongly made to come towardes them, they were ouertaken with feare especially Lyndaraza, which gessing at the trouth of the matter that hir long loue shoulde now take ende for very sorrowe fel to grounde, Trebatio comforted hir inasmuch as yet no

vyolence was offered, but she replyed wyth teares, saying. Alas my Lord I shall dye vnlesse you do iustice on this knight which hath here entered without my leaue, & which hath interrupted our ioyes by the destroying of my kéepers. Heerewith the Emperour very angry spake to the knight, saying. Sir knight why haue you come within this place without the lisence of this lady, it being hirs & kept by strong keepers for hir vse. The knight of the Sunne gently aunswered. Noble Emperour I confesse I demaunded no leaue, & till now I met with none which would aske wherefore I came, but my arrant is for your selfe which heere liue vnknowen, & haue forgotten your wyfe and Empire. The Emperour angerly replyed: neyther thou nor the whole world may bring me hence, & for thy good zeale to put me from my ioy, stay awhile and I will acquite thee thy fee. So hastely he flang to a chamber where he armed himselfe, the while that Lindaraza whom it touched as in especiall reuiled the knight of the Sunne for his thether comming. O saith she, thou saucie and vnmannerly knight howe hast thou had the face to enter my castle in despight of my porters, either departe hence quickly or tarry to abide the Emperours puissance. And if my minde deceiue me not I shall soone be satisfied for this disgrace. The knight of the Sun knowing how grieuous it would be vnto hir that the Emperour should leaue hir layd contrarywise w^t faire woords to perswade hir to giue consent to his departure, saying: Worthy lady may you not content your selfe with so many years in which you haue detained this noble & famous Emperour: both from wife & kindred, from land & subiect, but wil you also for your pleasure, neither lasting nor honest vndoe a whole countrey, & take a man from his wife which hath mourned for him xx. years. I beseech you madame contēt your selfe with y^t which is past and let him not wade farther in this errour which if it may plese you to remoue to your great honour at my entreatie. Hereat Lindaraza
all flrie could not abide the end of his sute, but with great outcries in insence y^e poore emperour, she put him off. The Emperour béeing armed, in great choller ranne vpon the knight of the Sunne, & without saying any thing laide at him with all his force. The knight of the Sun knowing that what y^e Emperour did, was but as done in a dreame, would not strike him to do him harme, but onely to saue himselfe & to finde the meanes whereby to bring Trebatio from that enchauntment. Therevpon by little & little he gaue back, that the Emperour following him, he might in the end bring him frō the inchaūted chamber. This came to passe accordinly, for as he made show of lacke of resistance, so y^e emperour thinking to follow the aduauntage pursued him to the great chamber wher the enchauntmēt first tooke effect. In short by this foresaid meanes ther also this emperour was brought to the point of auoiding the chamber, whereat Lindaraza fearing least he might be led cryed w^t a loude voice. Stay, stay, my lord, for this knight is full of falshood, and if you go out of this chamber both you & I shall dye. Héereat the Emperour who was not desirous of any thing but to please hir retourned backe. The knight of y^e Sun would not follow him, but stil kept at the pitch of the entry, & the Emperour would not come to him for feare of Lindaraza.Well, this deuise not succéeding the knight of y^e Sun thought now to try if he might carry him by maine force. This he knew woulde be a daungerous matter for the courage which he knewe in the Emperour, but all was well employed if he might set him at liberie. So towardes the Emperour he goeth, whome not prepared to fight, he sodeinly catcheth in his armes and with a lusty courage raiseth him from ground to haue carryed him away, but before the knight might get to the doore y^e Emperour catching holde likewise held the knight so shorte that for a while they tumbled in the hall, neyther parte gayning any great scantling of grounde, but the ods was
 
the knightes, & in the ende he quickly lifting vp the Emperour would he or not, he brought him without y^e chamber. The Emperour strugled to recouer the doore, but in their strugling they both tumbled downe the stayers. Nowe hath the knight of the Sunne played the man, for ere they came fuly to the ground the doores of the inchaunted chamber clapt together, wherewith and wyth the noyse thereoff a great part of the edifices sanke withall. The Emperour retourned to his former wittes presently sawe that he thought he had not stayed there past a day, and that which passed betwéene him and Lindaraza had bene but a short and pleasaunt dreame. After calling to minde his wife the faire Princesse Briana & the great hoast which he had left before Belgrado he became so sorrowfull that the teares trickled downe his cheekes in great measure. But of this manner and condition are we mortall men, that for our pleasures we sometimes forget our spouses the one halfe of our selues:sometimes neglect our children the more halfe of our selues: (as in whom the hope of posteritie resteth) and lastly sometimes we ouertourne our countrey which ought to be déerer to vs then our selues, neyther mindefull to what vse wée are created, namely to the benefite of others, neyther carefull what losse ensueth, as in especiall our owne discommoditie, but that which is more then carelesse, is the little thought of chaunge, and the lothinge to depart from it.That when we are at our wayes ende wée séeme but as it were nowe to begin a freshe: It is like a swéete sléepe, but let vs shake off thys drousie humoure, and let vs open our sleepy eyes. Let vs vse our selues so that sometimes we haue recourse to matters of more importaunce, and to thincke of heauen, to despise the vayne temporall thinges of this world, to seperate our selues from the man of felshe, and willingly to leaue him least he leaueth vs against our willes.Little shall remaine thereoff after scores of yeares, & that which remaineth shalbe shame & griefe for the life passed, besides desperate repentaunce which is a double torment. And much after this same manner was this valyant Emperour for his long delights with Lindaraza, now xx. yere was but a Summers day, & yet there left him not shame of his fact to fret his conscience, albeit he aduised himselfe the best remedy which I haue read off which is amendement of life, the safest hauen for a weatherbeaten penitent. First therefore knowing that this knight was hee which had as it were awaked him from his dreame, he pulled off his helmet & embraced him, giuing harty thanks for his deliueraunce. Withall, professing that he thought himselfe vnable to requite that great courtesy, yea, euen with the bestowing of his Empire, so assuredly hee ment not to forget it, if peraduenture God would shewe hym the occasion of dooing him seruice. For (saith he) you haue not saued my life, here might I haue liued without daunger of swoord, but you haue saued my soule .&c. Extolling the greatnesse of the benefit, & in the ende, he prayed him of courtesie to tell him his name and countrey with the cause of his comming to that Iland. The knight of the Sun answered him gently. Valiaunt emperour y^e thing which I haue done in your seruice is not like to y^t which I wish for, as your valour forceth my will, so my wil sueth a desert on your part, more vnto you then to all the knights of the world. But wit you I am called y^e knight of the Sunne, my countrey I know not, but my bringing vp hath ben in Babilon, where I was tolde y^t I was foūd vpō y^e sea, being a very child, my cōming to this castle was by chaunce, my boat being driuen by tempest vpon y^e shore wher séeing it so fresh & faire I had desire to know y^e owners, & fortune being fauourable, I passed through al killing y^e kéepers till I came within this court where I saw engrauen your whole history frō y^e time y^t you wer married with y^e princes Briana til time you were brought hether.

There knewe I the manner of your bewitching, & albeit your selfe were vnknown to me, yet I thought I would set you frée if that I might, from whence thys hath procéeded which you haue séene. When he had ended the Emperour embraced him many times with greate pleasure as well wondring at his greate prowesse, for he could not be ignoraunt of Lindarazas power, as also at hys boldnesse for a matter not touching hym in any respecte by all appearaunce. For he neither knewe countrey nor parents. But as the remembraunce of his wyfe & Empryre caused in the Emperour much griefe, so he besought the knight of the Sunne that they might departe from thence to goe into Greece where he might better thancke him then he had earst done. The knight of y^e Sun with a good affection to beare him company condescended easily rather yet vpon desire to know the countrey wherin he had heard to be right valiant knightes, then of any hope of reward. So when they came néere the outward court they found that knight (whome the knight of the Sunne had left in a traunce) nowe retourned to himselfe and vpon his féet safe and sound. The knight when he sawe the Emperour and the knight of the Sunne cōming downe, giuing great sighes and wéeping bitterly began to say. Oh what a dismall day is this for me, now my sister Lindaraza is dead and I haue lost a swéete companion, I would rather that I had bene killed by this straunger which hath destroyed all our good, then that I shoulde liue and susteyne such anguish. Little haue the monsterous keepers preuayled whome we put in our Castle to defende hir lyfe, and to defende the death which so sodeynly hath taken hir away. The Emperour hearinge him and knowing him ran to embrace him, saying. My déere friend Flamides howe chaunceth this heauinesse in your countenaunce? Why doe you fetch such deepe sighs and spill so many teares with so great sobbes. If it be for my departure and for the libertie which you haue

receiued by this knight, you know how long time I haue héere remained out of my remembraunce, and forgetfull of my Empire and kingdome, and shall I not go to comfort hir which long time by my absence hath bene comfortlesse. My Lorde sayde Flamides, I can not denye but your reason is good, and that the iniurie hath bene great in detayning you so long from thence, but as your excellencie knoweth there is no loue more naturall then betwéene brother and sister. O the death of my sister Lindaraza pearceth me to the heart, and I had rather then my life haue accompanied hir in death, then thus to bewayle hir lacke after death. For so soone as you came out of the inchaunted roome, my sister dyed presently, so was it appointed by y^e destinies, that no longer then she should enioye your presence she should liue. Blessed man, sayde the Emperour, & is Lindaraza dead, yea assuredly quoth he. Now on my honour (sayd the Emperour) hir death grieueth me, and during my life shall I be sad as oft as I shall call hir to remēbraunce, & although my case is such as in more néede of comfort then likely to comfort others, yet me thinckes I may tel you that you ought not to bewaile hir death so much, for belike a long time haue you knowē y^t hir life should not last after my departure. Now wherefore do you lamenet hir so sore as if it were but now thought on & not before foreséene. Againe your ouermuch carefulnes in fortifying your castle was but néedlesse, for it is giuen to man to haue y^e mastery ouer beaste which either by Art or Nature become tractable. And be it your castle had bene inexpugnable for all men in y^e world, yet what fence had you to shut out death. A man in no place can warrant himselfe such safetie as that at euery step he draweth himselfe néerer vnto death. Whether we be frée or bond, on foot or horseback, sléeping or waking, whole or sick, we dayly draw nere vnto our end: or if you wil speak more truely to our perfection, for then man beginneth to liue in déede when he goeth out of this miserable world.
Lindaraza is dead and wéeping may not recall hir, if you beare vnto hir any loue you may shew it nowe after hir death in receiuing to hir place hir daughter Lindaraza: for hir prouide y^t she may depart from hence, & I wil carry hir to my kingdome wher she shalbe in y^e estate as is due to y^e daughter of such parents: when the emperour had thus sayd, Flamides forced himselfe so much as he might for to speake, & thus aunswered him. Your reason satisfieth my vnderstanding, & I confesse it true that we ought not to wéepe when death assaileth vs, neither ought we to make straunge of it, for in the end we must leaue this world, & then is there nothing more certeine, but my conceit builded vpon outward sence béeing contrary to reason troubleth againe that part where affections are & maketh it rebellious, and howsoeuer men be prouided for death by continuall thought that they muste dye: ordinarily notwithstanding we thincke our selues immortall till death attacheth vs. And what olde man onely for age is so féeble that he hopeth not for a day to liue: But as to Lindaraza my sister, I beléeue that although you had stayed here many dayes, the secret of this aduenture had neuer bene disclosed vnto you, neither do you knowe the cause why you were brought & put héere. But I will tell you plainly. My sister Lindaraza & I had both one father named Palisteo being the second son to y^e king of Phrygia, my father not being borne to the kingdome fell rather to seke his owne delight without enuy, then to trouble him selfe with the care of gouerning. Aboue all he studied the Arte Magicke, where by his paines at length came to the most absolute perfection of all in Asia, he was matched wyth a Lady of high parentage, by whome he had two children, my sister Lindaraza and me, wee were of young yeares when our mother dyed in labour of y^e third child, so ther remained none else but our father aliue, & louing to be solitarie came & dwelled in this Iland, bringing w^t him my sister & those waiting women

which you haue séene, by his greate skill he buylded thys Castle, heere he lyued vntill my sister and I were of some discretion to guyde our selues. Héere he drewe many histories of thinges passed in the worlde, and among other the picutres of many valiant knightes which were thē on liue, with the rest you were so liuely drawen that it happening my sister to enter one day where y^e Imagery was, by the sight of your picture she was surprised with your loue. Our father Palisteo knowing hir disease deuised you should be brought by following your owne wife carried from you. For this cause was this enchauntment made in that quarter of the castle wherein you abode without making your selfe priuie to your owne estate that if your knights came to séeke you they might not perswade you hence, neither could euer perswasion haue serued, onely force which this man hath vsed. When the wise man our father had done all this, he declared vnto vs the secretes of these thinges, and farther tolde vs by his Arte that the time should come when you should be deliuered from the enchauntment, although he knewe not when nor in what manner. He tolde vs that at such time as you should bée at large, my sister Lindaraza should dye, either for the griefe that she should conceiue, or for that the fates had so appointed. Moreouer that you shoulde haue a daughter by hir which might not hence depart till ther should come a knight which should winne the entries once againe, & after marry hir. Of this knight he said that there should spring the race, whence issueth y^e two noble families much spoken off throughout the world, the one house to be called Mongrana, y^e other Claramonte, me he charged not to leaue the Castle till my néece Lindaraza should be acquited. After this, out father Palisteo béeing sore sicke dyed, since his death hitherto euery thing hath fallen out accordingly. And thus you haue heard the whole processe of my tale, and the cause why your daughter Lindaraza can not goe from hence at this time.The Emperour and the knight of the Sunne had very attentiuely lystened to all that which Flamides had spoken: and albeit the Emperour was desirous to carry his daughter Lyndaraza with him, he could not yet refuse to leaue hir when he coulde not otherwise chuse, and he besought Flamides that at such time as they came both out that they should take the way to Greece there to reioyce with him. After they had thus argued a little Flamides brought them through that part of the Castle which was not enchaunted showing them manye thinges aswell of halls of cloysters, as of pictures and payntry whereat the Emperour and the Knight of the Sunne were greatly amased. And for that that day the Knight of the Sunne hadde not eaten, Flamides made them sit in a faire parlour where they had plenty of daynty vyands: when they had eaten, the Emperour being desirous to depart, desired Flamides to conuey him through the gates. So (by the way) this péece of the story as I haue hearde was afterward penned and portrayed in the court hall of the Emperours pallayce at Constantinople. But they wente through all the gates of the Castle and of the bridge tyll they came where the pillours stoode. Ther Flamides tooke his leaue of the Emperoure and of the Knight of the Sunne.When Flamides had departed from them, and they had passed through the bridges presently the gates of the Towers clapt together with great noyse, being as surely shutte as euer they were. The emperour and the knight of the Sunne were amased at the straunge things which had happened in that Castle and toke the waye towards the Sea by the same path, in which they had come reioycing at the swéete harmonye which the birdes made in those pleasaunt trées, so that although they went a foote, yet it séemed no payne vnto them. And the loue that they bare to each other was so great that it could not haue had bene more if they had knowen each other especiallye the

Emperour, who so often as he saw his face thought vppon the Princesse Briana whome he much resembled. In this manner the father and the sonne trauayled running ouer in their discourse straunge thinges of the enchaunted Castle, till that they approched the mayne sea wheras yet the lyttle boate stoode in which the Knighte of the Sunne had come thether. Now for that along the shore there were no more boats, the Emperour was somewhat sorrowfull seeming to him that hee was ill furnished to go whether he purposed, and telling it to the Knighte of the Sunne. The knight of the Sunne aunswered. My Lorde I pray you be not agrieued with this, for the boat is guyded by a wise man a friende of mine, one as I beléeue so carefull to carry me hence, as he hath friendelye sent me to worke your delyueraunce. Besides, this boate will holde vs both, and if it be so you will vouchsafe my shippe you shall neuer sayle more safe neither better prouided for victualls. The Emperour was greatly amazed at it that all things were so plentifull with the Knight of the Sunne. But both very merry they entred into the boat which being driuē from shore so soone as it tooke the shore sayled amayne, neyther missed they oughte which was thē thought necessary. Quickly they hasted ouer the Sea Euxinus where wee wyll leaue them vntill an other time, to write of other things which chaunced before this time.¶ The three Princes which went in the quest of Rosicleer, were transported into the Empire of Trabisond where chaunced to them a faire aduenture. Cap. 45.AS the valyaunt déedes of Rosicleer while he was there caused great ioy in the court of king Oliuerio: so no lesse was the grief ther for his sodeine departure amongest his friendes, yet all these sorrowes ioyned in one might not be equall to that which

the faire Oliuia felt, for she seing she had ben y^e cause theroff, tooke thereat such inwarde griefe that she became both weake and pale and hir father with the whole court greatly lamented for hir. In this generall sorrowe for the losse of Rosicleer, you must thinke that the Princessses Rodasylua and Syluerina were not free, for the losse of Rosicleer procured the absence of their loues. So as the history recounteth that they two together with the valyant Prince Zoylo tooke vppon them the search of him and therefore lette vs leaue the courte of kinge Oliuerio to tell you of them.Thus it is, that after they were all embarked in the hauen which was néerest to London they sayled forwards a months saylyng, not desiring to bend either this way or that way. At the ende of the month rather vpon chaunce then their purpose they were dryuen vppon the coast of Trabisond where yet glad they were when the countrey was descryed to sée it and to abide there. Comming ot lande armed with their rich armour and theire squires accompanying them they tooke their horse and riding throughe a beaten pathe at the side of a pleasaunt woode they heard a noyse, wherat being moued they tourned backe to sée what it might be.Out of the thickest of the woode they sawe a wylde Boare driuing so fast as possibly it might, and in the pursuite thereoff, a young gentlewoman vppon a mightye courser and a Boare speare in hir right hande, hir hunters wéede was all of gréene veluet, hir tresses hanging downe in colour lyke the golde of Araby, in hir left hand a wande of golde and two rich Pearles hanging at hyr eares. She came spurring hir horse in such wise and with such courage to ouertake the Boare that she much delyghted them, and at suche time as the Boare crossed the way betweene them and hir she strake the Boare on the flancke, that hyr speare appeared at the other side of the Boare.The game was gotte, and the Lady not taking héede of the other knights perhappes shaddowed by the trées retourned with softe paces to hir company, but the knights ouertooke hir and as I may say abashed at that whiche they had séene, at hir graces and beautie, they only gased one vppon the other not once making offer to salute hir, wherat the Lady more bolde then the men as it were to awake them out of their dreames tooke and winded a faire horne which honge at hir necke so loude and shryll that all the forest and valleyes rang thereoff, and when she had thus done she came to the thrée Princes in hir seming the proprest knights that euer she set eye on, whom she friendly welcomed on this wise. God saue you gentle knights and sende you the comforte of your loues for by your sadde and demure lookes, it séemes you are either straungers or others thrall.The knights tourning towardes hir made their courteous obeysaunce, and for them the valyaunt Tartarian spake in this manner. Madame we haue stoode estonished neither for straungenesse, nor for ill successe in loue, which some of vs haue not yet tryed, but onely for the thought of your beautye being a Ladye huntresse as if you were Diana which in lyke attire was was wont to hunte the forests: but as you say we are straungers indeede, and bicause wee woulde carrye somewhat worthe the tellyng wee craue youre name, and the fashions of the countrey.The Lady delighted in the good behauiour of the thrée knights and tickeled with the wordes of the Tartarian, in great maiestye aunswered him. Assuredly sir knight I knowe no cause you haue to meruayle at me, but rather I at you. For if I seeme to you lyke to Diana the goddesse of the Gentiles, you lykewise seeme to me the thrée sonnes of Priamus: Hector, Paris, and Troylus, not farre inferior in renowne to the Gods themselues, whereas you desire me to make you knowe who I am, I will doe

it gladly but yet conditionally, that afterwardes you tell me your name and countrey. This shall be one for one, and by iust exchaunge wee shall héereafter finde peace.Wit you now that I am called Claridiana the daughter to Theodoro Lord of this Empyre and to the Empresse Diana Quéene of the Amazones which two hauing bene mortall enemyes as by long warres appeareth, continued hotly on either parte, they were after greate friendes méeting in a pitched field either being then young and vnmarryed. I am their onely childe which since my young yeares haue bene brought vp in hunting and I am promised to be made knight, for my mother being but young achieued such enterprises that in hir time there was no knight more famous, and I am desirous to be somewhat lyke vnto hir especiallye in that poynte. And nowe sir knights tel me who you are for I would wel accompany such lusty knights.The Tartarian who had first taken in hande to speak aunswered. Noble Princesse we were sure inough that there wanted not in you the diuinitye we spake off: but yet we fayled in the name, for so many graces which accompany you could not be in a Lady of lesse estate, as my Relygion being Pagansiue woulde rather haue induced mee to take you for the daughter of Iupiter, then of the Emperour Theodoro. And now sith your excellency hath shewed vs such vndeserued fauour as to tell vs who you are, it is reason that we obaye in tellinge who wee are, and where we were borne. This knight poynting to Bargandel sayth he is the Prince Bargandel the kynges sonne of Bohemia, this, by Liriamandro sayth he is the Prince of Hungary called Liriamandro, and I am called Zoylo sonne to the king of Tartary, we haue ioyned for aduenture beginning in the great Britaine to finde a new knighte a friende of ours taken from vs wee wette not howe. Him we are determined to looke in the worlde

and we haue already sayled a moneth since we left England, so this morning we landed héere very glad to haue founde your highnesse. God be praysed sayd the Princesse for the names of so high Princes oughte not to be concealed, especially héere where the Emperour my Father would be glad of such knights for the honour which his court should receiue thereby, and I for my part would thinke it a great courtesie in you, if you would stay héere till I were knighted. for by such noble Princes might I be honoured. In the meane while, the courtesie which our court can afforde shalbe accomplished to the full, and after that you may tourne you to your purposed iourney. The Princesse had thus sayd, and strayght wayes there came from the forest thirtie gentlewomen on rych palfrayes, and in long wéedes of gréene taffeta, amonge them also a troupe of more then thirtie knights all surely armed with their speares in their handes comming to seeke the Princesse, which beinge better horsed then they had killed the Boare long before their approche. The Princes when she saw them said to the three Princes. My good Lords if you thought it not amisse, I would see what my knights woulde doe in my defence, Bargandel aunswered. Noble Lady the thing cannot displease vs which contēteth you, we wil endaunger our persons to serue you. The Princesse then called hir knightes, and sayde vnto them.In good time my friends are you come. These thrée knightes whome you sée héere would haue carryed me away against my wil, But I praied them not to offer such wrong to a gentlewoman, and if they woulde therewith satisfie themselues, I offered them that of my knights so many, as they shoulde hurle downe or vnhorse, they should haue so many of my gentlewomen for rewarde & themselues or any of them were ouerthrowen that then the party faulting should forfette horse and harnesse. Héereto they haue agréed, now doe the best you can to defend the

gentlewomen which are in your company. Heere the Prince Zoylo which knew the Princesse meaning sayde vnto hir. Nay madame let vs first know whether the gētlewomen will yeeld to our couenaunt or no, and let their knights speak for them. Mary aunswered the knights we are content. Yea but so are not we sayd the gentlewomē shall we say they venture imprisonment vpon our knights and they lose nothing, they may betray vs if they wyll, but we feare rather that it will not be in theire power. Ye mary aunswered the knights you are now wise: but if you be so fearefull, we pray you alter the iustes to the tryall of the sword, & you shall see presently these knights both ashamed and vnhorsed.Nay but yet quoth the gentlewomen we had néede of better warrants then your wordes, but if you will deale with our knights as we would haue you, you must wager your horse and armour to be giuē them with vs if you fayle, and thereto we request these knights straungers otherwise to discharge the Princesse of hir promise. The thrée Princes fayned to mislyke the gentlewomans deuice, and the knightes of the countrey wer angrye to see howe lyttle hope theire gentlewomen hadde in them. So comminge vnto the three Princes, they sayde vnto them.Syr knights you may beholde héere that our gentlewomen are not content with the first match therefore we will vnbind it and lose as much as you should therefore take to your selues so much of the field as you shal thinke good, and lette vs to the iust for we will deceiue the women of the little hope they haue in our vertue. Three of the knights at this Alarme prepared themselues to iust and the three Princes did as much gladde to shew there their manhood.The three first knights were borne downe horse and man to the great discomfitte of the Ladyes, whereoff one mockt hir knight for his courage crying. Marry it seemes

sir knighte that I mighte haue beene safe betwéene your armes, when you knowe not how to sit sure within your saddle. Which wordes caused as great laughter in the Princesse, as shame and confusion to the knights which were on grounde.Then came thrée other which doing as much as the other were in lyke manner welcomed. So that to make short tale from thrée to thrée the Princes vnhorsed whole thirtie, and no man offered a seconde course: but yet the shame of their falles so egged them on, that they demaunded the combat with the swordes. Heereat the knights which knew well inough the Princesse purpose made a great stay as it were to consult with their power bring straungers and but thrée, in the ende saye they. You know that y^e price which was ordained at these iusts were your horse and armour the which you haue lost, if you will therefore needes vrge vs to the combatte with the swordes, lay away your horse and armour which are ours and come your wayes. Otherwise you must begge the vse of them at these gentlewomen to whome we surrender our whole title.Mary sayde one of the gentlewomen. My Lordes we accepte of your courtesie, and heere we els staye the combat, for we will not giue them leaue the seconde tyme to lose both and vs. The knights were so ashamed asw the Princes wordes as for the gentlewomans rebuke, that altogether with their swordes drawen they would haue rushed vpon the straungers, if the Princesse comminge betweene hadde not stayed them, speaking to the straungers. That this was sufficient, and it greatly lyked hir that they had thus shewed theire valour.Where to Prince Zoylo aunswered. Madame wee haue besides to demaunde our prices which we will not otherwise remitte but to your selfe, wherat smiling they all vnbuckeled their helmets Bargandel and Liriaman-dro béeing then of the age of xx. yeares, séeming so beautifull that as well the gentlewomen as the knights were amazed at them. After them the Tartarian shewed himselfe, who although he was a Morian borne, & somewhat of colour tawnie, yet had he a manly countenaunce, and therwithall pleasant, that he pleased them as well as his companions. With this there are no moe foes to be feared as it appeareth said the Princesse, if you challengers vnarme your selues, but if it be no griefe to you let vs go together to the citie of Trabisond not beeing farre off, for at your instance I may y^e sooner receiue y^e order. The Princes thancking the Lady for that fauour, prepared themselues to obey hir commaund, so rid they on wyth the Princesse towardes Trabisond where they stayed about xv. dayes much encreasinge their honour at the feastes proclaimed for the knighting of the enheritresse, they béeing made known to none but to y^e princesse: here likewyse the great prowesse which the Princesse Claridiana shewed were suche that euery man was amazed at them.Albeit the thrée Princes neuer iusted against hir but héereafter you shall heare sufficiently of hir and them, now to the two Princes Brandizel and Clauergudo whome we left in the kingdome of Persia very sadde for the losse of their déere friende the worthy knyght of the Sunne.¶ The two Princes Brandizel and Clauergudo stale secretly out of the kingedome of Persia, to finde the knight of the Sunne. Cap. 46.NOwe you are to remember your selues of the two valiant Princes Brandizel & Clauergudo which remained in y^e kingdome of Persia very pensiue for y^e losse of their friend, touching whom the history saith that after

these two princes wer in Persia some daies hauing great desire to finde out the knight of y^e Sun & to séeke straunge aduentures: one day as they were with Armineo vnckle to Clauergudo, they determined betwéene themselues for to depart closely frō them, & to go by sea whethersouer fortune would transport them, wherto although Clauergudo & Armineo would haue made the king Florion priuie, yet the Prince Brandizel would in no case consēt, beleeuing y^t if his parents knewe of it they would not giue him leaue to go from them, so to pleasure him they kept that counsell as priuie as they could. And when al things wer in readines, one night secretly they cōuaied thēselues out of y^e citie & so straight to y^e sea side where they entered into a ship prouided for that purpose, & hoising vp sailes they were carried, they neither knew nor cared whether, for the courages of these two princes resolued to y^e search of worthy aduentures would not let them be quiet, so y^t any thing might better content their ease at home. But as soone as they were gone the wise Lyrgandeo knew of it, and waying the great commoditie which might ensue thereoff to themselues & others, he would not hinder it, nor it make as if he knew it, yet had he gret care to guide their ship wherein they sailed, & they reached thether in .xv dayes which to other is an ordinary monethes sayling. That the marriners were abashed to sée the swiftnesse of the shyp béeing more then vsuall, which when they had discouered to their Lordes, the Princes knewe presently by whose meanes it so happened, wherefore yet they were the better apayed for nowe they were sure thether to be carried which fitted best for their auayle. Well, shortly after these princes departure, & before it was either so noised or suspected, Lyrgandeo declared y^e truth to the king Florion & the Quéene Balisea willing them withall not to afflict thē for y^t they thereby should gaine much honour & should retourne safely with the knight of y^e Sun in their company. With this y^e king & Quéene were indiffe-

rently appeased. Now all matters quieted in Persia for y^e princes absence, we may the fréelier beare y^e knights company which are yet sailing on the sea, so y^t the xv. day after they were departed from Persia, they landed in a hauē of Polonia where their ship stood stil, & taking land to learne some newes & know the country ere they had long trauailed they saw before them a little towne to their iudgemēt pleasant, & round about great flocks of men & women scattered, & making great cries as if some great mischaunce had happened to them. Armineo demaūded of them the cause of their sorrow, whereto an auncient man amonge them answered, y^t a fierce gyant w^t more thē fiftie knights had come this morning vpon thē to steale away y^e princesse Clarinea daughter to the king of Polonia their liege lord, y^t he had killed the greater number, & spoiled the residue. And as he thought was ere this time on his way with y^e princesse in his carriage, from whom if it so be not all the world may recouer hir? why so said Armineo & where is y^e king, or where are his knights y^t they do not defend their lady. The olde man answered, they are in a town iiij. mile off, not mindeful of any such matter & it hath not ben past viij. daies since y^e princesse came to this towne, & now this which you haue heard hath happened to hir: when y^e three knights heard this of y^e olde mans relacion, w^tout staying longer they galloped w^t their horses so fast as they might, & comming néere to y^e towne they saw issuing out of the gates a great troup of knights, y^e ere part driuing y^e other before it. For so it was y^t the gyant hauing the princesse in his power was carying hir away & y^e townsmen fought with him, but their power little preuailed, the gyant was strong, his knights many, & so they murdered al y^t came, in such sort y^t the town dwellers fled: then came y^e other knightes which slew many of them. Twenty of the gyants knights at once fell vpon them laying at them w^t al their forces, y^e meane while y^e gyant held in his armes y^e princesse Clarinea, & thinking y^t his knights wold make

riddaunce of these thrée, he tooke no more kéepe but rode away softly with the princesse. The princesse cried out so loud y^t it was great pitie to heare hir, & those which heard hir of hir own knights, came pitifully crying to y^e knights straungers y^t for the honour of god they should go help hir. When this was spoke, Brandizel besought his companions to stay ther in y^e battail, & to giue him leue to follow y^e gyant, which whē they graunted him, he putting the spurs to his horse followed the trace, the whiles the knights of Fraunce throughly galded their enimies. For y^e one of thē matchable I dare auouch with y^e auncient Franconio the Troyans sonne, of whom he descended: for he putting himselfe in prease among them, to some claue their heads, to other some their sheelds murdering many & felling many, y^t at length there was none so hardy which durst stand him a blow, but euery of thē did his best to saue one. His vnckle Armineo in y^e broile helped not a little, for he was a valiant knight & much esteemed off in Fraunce. But let vs leaue them & speake of the prince Brandizel who pursued the Gyant. He rode so fast that ere the gyant came within a flight shot of y^e sea, he ouertoke in a large plaine & crying aloud bad him redeliuer y^e princes false faytour as he was. The gyant loked back to se what he was, & seeing but one though riding in hast he cared not for him, saue y^t not to be foūd vnprouided, he losed y^e princes frō betwéene his armes & set hir on groūd: y^e prince cōming to him spake neuer a woord, but drawing his sword hit him so great a blow vpon y^e helmet y^t he made him boowe his head to his brest, wherwith y^e gyant encreased in choller & gaue him y^e like: this begā y^e skirmish between thē wherein y^e noise was so great y^t y^e princesse Clarinea before in a sound retourned to hir selfe, & seeing y^e battaile with so little hope as y^e one onely knight should aduenture hir deliuerance, fell into a sound again, wherein she had dyed for sorrow had not god prouided hir y^e means she looked not for, & the comfort she hoped not: & she was y^e rest of y^e battaile a ioyful beholder.

Whē they had thus fought an houre, it was a wōde: to se their brused armour w^t their hacked shieldes, but euer y^e stéele coate defended the biting of their swoordes, especially Brandizels, which made by Art Margicke had this vertue that no mettalle might pearce it. The Gyant was hurt in many places, whereat as at the force of his aduersary he was greatly estonished & blasphemed his gods in desperate manner which had made him stay that good knightes comming. The Princesse Clarinea séeing the Gyantes bloud thus couer the ground, was very glad & hir colour became fresh which much encreased hir beautie whereto also (Fortune willinge to be fauourable) it was so that the Prince Brandizel beholding hir was enamored of hir beautie and entierly loued hir. For his heart nowe set on fire augmented his courage, and he buffeted y^e Gyant, so that in short time he vnarmed hym in many places. In the ende the Prince desirous to gyue end to y^e battaile, raysed in his styroppes, stroke a full blowe at the Gyant vpon the shoulder that his swoorde entered a handfull and the gyant fell dead. The Prince séeinge him fall, presently leaped from his horse and pulling off his helmet went to the Princesse to recōfort hir, sayinge. Madame I beséech you accept in good part this little seruice at his handes which desireth to do you much more. The Princesse very ioyfull to sée hir enemy on ground, & more glad to sée hir friend so goodly a man courteously answered. Noble knight you haue done so much for me that w^t al y^t which my father hath. I shal not be able to requite it you, but if you wil y^t this good which haue done me do like me in déed, shew me so much fauour as to cary me to y^e king my father, for hither wil come y^e residue of y^e gyants knights, & thē my liberty is to begin again: y^e prince gently taking both hir handes in his, kissed them & said vnto hir. Madame if it please you we may retourne to the towne frō whence we came, for I beléeue y^t these knights of whō you speak, are but few aliue to put vs in danger,

I left my companions fighting with thē, who I am sure haue done their parts, and yet they shall do vs no wrong though they be many. But in far greater ieopardy am I of my life by you, if you vouchsafe me not your seruice, wherwith y^e princesse was nothing offended for she liked very wel his comedly personage, but she answered nothing. The prince seing y^e princesse without a palfray toke hir vp behinde him & with easy paces rid towardes y^e towne. In which way y^e prince with many amorous woords feasted the princesse & manifested to hir his loue, & after disclosing himselfe also he beséeched hir to kéepe it secret, which she did, resoluing notwithstanding if hir father were so content, not to match otherwise. Well, néere y^e towne they came where they sawe a great troupe of knights hasting so fast as they might, & in déed they were the king & his knights, more then 500. in number, who by the report exited to succour their princesse came to the towne, & finding almost all the gyants knights taken or slaine by y^e prince Clauergudo and Armineo with such ayde as the towne afforded they altogether follow on in the pursute of y^e gyant which had led hir away. Now there were of y^e com- company which a farre off ascried the Princesse behinde Brandizel, & learning that it was the knight which rode to follow the gyant, they tolde it to the king, whereat he was very glad, and making much of the thrée straungers, especially of Brandizel, he spake on this wise. Sir knight how shall I be able to requite this friendship which you and your companions haue shewed to me. Assuredly I knowe not though I should giue you my kingdome, for were it not for you I shoulde haue lost this day my daughter Clarinea, and with hir my ioye and pleasure which being lost what ioy should I haue foūd in ruling, but tell me I pray you how you dealt with y^e Gyaunt for he was stronge and great. Sir sayth Brandizel offering to kisse his handes which the kinge gently refused.Sir saith he, mightie Prince my companions & I thinke our Fortune to be very good in that we are thether ariued where we may doe seruice to so courteous a Prince, and it is reward sufficient your acceptation. As touching the Gyant his ill purpose was his owne decay, for he is already dead, not farre from hence. The king wondered to heare tell that the Gyant was dead, for by the report of his bignesse he thought it impossible that one onely knight should coape with him, and then much more making of the Princes, he imbraced them often times, & desired them to tell him their names which at length they did. And the king vnderstanding of their byrthes carried them with himselfe towardes he towne where in the way he tolde them who that gyant was, and what the cause was why he had come thether in such sort, saying. My lords this gyant was called Lamberdo, Lorde of the Iland of Perda, not farre hence he hath since the time he was first knighted neuer employed his time to other aduauntage but to robbing & spoyling and for this he hath an Iland excéeding strong, but very little and scarce well peopled. In this he may defend him from any enimy, & bestowing his espies in euery corner to watch for some such cheuisance, he knewe that my daughter Clarinea was in this towne wih a fewe knightes, so hither hée made a voyage and had stolen hir away, but that God be blessed, such valyaunt knightes as you came in suche a time for hir succour, while the king tolde this tale they were within the towne wals, & as they entered through the streets, the whole towne gathered together to sée the Prince which had slayne Lambardo. And then through the towne they came to the kings pallaice where they abode a great while.¶ Rosicleer departeth from the Iland of Cadramarte and meeteth with certeine aduenturers on the Sea. Cap. 47.THe historie left y^e valiant Rosicleer very sad in y^e Iland of Candramarte as well for hys ladies letter, as for that the knight of the Sunne departed from him so sodeynly that he could not knowe hym. For remembring himselfe of the woordes which the wise Artemidoro had tolde him as concerninge his brother, his minde gaue him that it might be hée, wherefore as without hope euer to sée him, and not hauing to comfort his afflicted spirites, he burst out into teares, sayinge. O Fortune howe hast thou bene froward to me aboue all men. First before I was borne I lost my Father, and when I was borne my Mother was in sorrowe and care for me, and scarcely began I to know the world when I was bannished from hir whom I loued déerer then my selfe. And nowe by chaunce haue I bene brought to the company of a noble knight with whome I might haue bene more friendly acquainted, but the waues rose vp against mée, and haue carried him awaye from me as if I were vnworthy of any good. When he had wept his fill he went to one of the Castles, there to set such things in order as were disquieted by the death of their Lord, and to comfort the woful Gyantesse, whom he after matched with one of y^e best knights of all those whom the gyant had left, giuing them liuerie & season in that land, & making others to sweare obedience. Short time after hée would needes depart with full purpose to kéepe in the sea and not to depart till that he should haue sayled so farre that no woordes might be heard of him in those quarters. Therefore he tooke hys armour, wherein was drawen the God of loue, in such sort as our auncestors were wont to paynt him, with his eyes out, his bowe and arrowes in his hand: The picture béeing so liuely drawen y^t Rosicleer knewe it was done by the wise Artemidoro, and therevpon he tooke his name of that deuise, from whiche time he neuer called himselfe other then the knight of Cupid, vnder which name he achiued many enterprises,

and Rosicleers name came neuer more to the eares of Oliuia.Hauing put on his armour he tooke his leaue of Candriana for so was called the daughter of Candramarte and for remembraunce onely the shippe wherein he firste sayled when he left great Britayne, with two marriners to conduct it, whom he charged not to call by other name then the knight of Cupide, and to guyde the shippe Eastwarde. When he had so sayled fifteene dayes without chauncing to him any thing worthy of recytall. It was so that one morning by Sunne rising he saw a little boat passe by him, out of which he hearde many cryes as if it had bene the laboure of some woman, and thincking that there might be néede of helpe, he was desirous to knowe what was in the shippe, and therevpon he commaunded to ioyne with them.Presently there stept vpoon the hatches a sadde auncient man with a white bearde all armed saue the heade which demaunded what he would. Rosicleer sayde I woulde knowe who is in your shippe for mee thinckes I haue hearde some woman complayne, and if it bee so I will venture my person to doe hir good. The auncient knight beheld Rosicleer, and taking him to be some knight of great bountie, especially in that he had offered himselfe so fréely. When he had throughly behelde, he opened the matter on his sort. Assuredly good knighte I thancke you for your great good wil an dit is not misbeséeming youre outwarde beautye to haue some inwarde vertue lyke thereto.But knowe you that in this shippe there abydeth a gentlewoman making towardes the great Britayne ther to complayne hir to the king Oliuerio & his knightes, of y^e outrage which is done vnto hir. Now bicause our stay is daungerous, I may not tel you farther of this matter, our enemyes followe vs, and so reste you with GOD. When the olde man had sayde this, Rosicleer hauinge

desire to knowe more stayed him and besought him to discourse more at large, for himselfe was a knighte of that court and could tell him what remedye was to be hoped for there. The olde man was loth to stay longer, yet hearing him say that he was of the same court he tolde hym in fewe wordes that this gentlewoman was the Princesse Arguirosa one of the fayrest Ladyes in the worlde, and a Princesse of Thessaly, only heire to that kingdome. That hir mother being dead, the king Arguidoro hir father fell in loue with a gentlewoman of Thessaly, not so honest nor of so high estate, as wanton and of base birth: and louing hir affectionately, after marryed hir, to the dispossessing of his owne childe. Then in the time of hir fathers lyfe ther was in the court a knight called Rolando, besides his great liuing one of y^e strongest knights in all those parties, but proude, and little respecting the whole worlde. That this knight during the lyfe of the king was lyked of Ipesea, and so soone as the kinge Arguidoro dyed of a soddayne disease, was promoted to the kings bedde by matching with the Quéene, and being of greate reuenues that he nowe enioyed the kingedome by force, and excluding the right heire, none of the kingdome daring to gaynesay him, for the most able are his nigh kinsmen, the other learne patience perforce. But that which worst of all was, that to vndoe hir rightefull claime hee mindeth to marrye hir with a kinsman of his and to giue onely some lyttle towne to dwell in in, reseruinge the title of the kingdome after his owne dayes to a sonne the which hee hath begotten on his Quéene Ipesea.I am kinsmā saith he to the Princes being hir mothers brother, and therefore I haue aduentured to relieue my néece, but not knowing any remedy at home biscause my power is not equall with Rolandos, I haue broughte hir out from thence, and I determine to goe to the great Britaine, where as I heaue heard are there many valyaunt

knights especially a new knight, of whom I haue heard especially since the great feasts therholden. If this knight helpe me not, I knowe not who may withstand Rolando. Thrée nights and dayes haue we bene vppon the Sea: onely I, the Lady, two gentlewomen, and our marriners, and I beléeue that ther come after vs Rolandos knights. Nowe haue I tolde you the whole of your desire, and I beséech you tell vs, what newes you knowe of that good knight.Rosicleer nowe hauing hearde the whole state of the Princes Arguirosas matter was much troubled, and desirous to helpe hir he aunswered the auncient man, that for his staye he thancked him, and as touching your demaunde sayth he of the newe knight. Truth it is that in Britayne none can tell you newes of him, wherefore your labour shoulde be lost if you sought him there. But the Princesses affliction so much moueth me, that albeit I was purposed otherwhere, yet woulde I gladly fighte with Rolando in the Princesses behalfe.The auncient knight was very sad to heare that the newe knighte was not in Britayne, but well eying this knight which had so tolde him and made proffer of helpe, he stoode in doubt whether to take or refuse, by and by he discouered two shippes vnder sayle, and by theire toppes to be of Thessaly, whereat striking himselfe on the brest he cryed out. O most vnhappy that we are, heere commeth Rolandos knights which will take vs, and being brought agayne to Thessaly we shall there receiue most cruel death, & he wept cursing the houre of his departure, the Princesse Arguirosa hearing the complaints which hir vncle made, his great sorrowe which hee sustayned, the extreame daunger they were in, and the cause why he did it, tooke it as heauily, and wofully bewayled their misery.When Rosicleer sawe them in this plyghte, he much pitied them, especailly Arguirosa, which the Princesse
Oliuia not remembered mighte haue well contented him. Therefore he willed them to gette vnder the hatches agayne, and to lette him shifte for their safetie, the olde man thinking that Rosicleer would defende them by saying that they were his people, did so, not ceasing yet to feare the worst and to pray earnestly for their escape. Rosicleer lept into the Princesse shippe, and sate vppon the brimme therof to sée what would happen, till that the other ship came néere, and that he which was the Captayn commaunded to grappell, and espyinge Rosicleer with a proude voyce badde him say both who himselfe was, and what people he had in his shippe, and not to faile in anye poynt. Wherto Rosicleer by and by aunswered. I am a straunger in these parts ,and farther it is no reason that you know who they are that are with mée, for we kéepe our way without molesting thée or thine. The Captaine angry for his short speach sayd to him. I will strike thy heade into the water vnlesse thou aunswer me directly to my question, and so sayng he halde and pulde Rosicleer to haue forced him. Rosicleer thus rudely entreated rose vp, and with his gauntlette gaue the Captayne such a blow vppon the helmette, that his braynes flewe aboute his heade, and presently hee fell into the water, where the weight of his armour kepte him downe. Strayghtwaies more then twentie knightes well armed and well angred for y^e death of their Captain altogehter with their swords in their hāds smote at him. Rosicleer drawing out Quéene Iulias blade, stoke agayne with such courage that at thrée blowes three knights were slayne, and those which presently knewe his great prowesse drew backe, making no great hast to come néere him. Rosicleer knowing his enemyes feare leaped into their ship and there layd so about him that in short space he killed halfe of them. The Princesse Arguirosa and the auncient knight now began to shew themselues aboue boorde and they greatly wondred at his manhood.So shortly after Rosicleer was alone in his enemyes shippe without resistaunce, eyther all being slayne, or all slayne or wounded, or slayne, wounded, or by flyght escaped: for Rosicleers owne shippe was lost in this garboyle. Now retourned he to Arguirosas shippe wherin she with the olde man receyued him, Rosicleers salutacion to the Princesse after this exployt was in this wise. Madame what hath bene done your selfe hath séene, but for a recompence hereoff, I shall thinke my selfe throughly satisfied if you will venture that into my hands which you dare hazarde into the hands of the newe knight. For I promise you, I will as willingly ieopard my person as he shall. Now when Rosicleer had so sayd the Princes and y^e olde man stared a good while without speking word for the consideration of their owne daunger, past recouery if this man fayled, made them the more wary, and so betwéene the examination of Rolandos valour and Rosicleers hardinesse. In the ende Arguirosa hir selfe rather vppon loue towardes him, then of assured confidence woulde put hir matter to no other tryall then Rosicleers, so she commended hir quarrell to him on this sort. The courtesie valyuant knighte, which you haue offered mee thoughe vnworthy, hath bene so greate that I wante the boldenesse to accepte more, yet bicause you earst defended me from death by the vanquishing of Rolandos knights, and now againe you will néedes take vppon you a further matter, rather not to refuse you, then willyng to trouble you agayne, I will retourne with you to my countrey, and committe wholy to your handes the whole ordering both of my selfe and my cause: hir vnckle gaue his consent thereto, and Rosicleer thanked them much. So they sayled to Thessalya, where by the way Rosicleer casting in his thought how to redres y^e Princes wrong, to y^e least displeasure of hir and hir vnckle which were lothe to bee knowen, determined as a straunger to enter the land and to demaunde iustice as it were agaynst a person not kno-

wen. To which deuice after he had made them priuie, and promised that they shoulde not be disclosed till it so serued for their auayle, they were better comforted, and sailed with so good winde that they tooke landing in a hauen neere the place where the king was, taking lande he made the Princesse to put on a muffler, & the olde knight to couer his heade, besides bidding both to counterfayte for the tyme some straunge behauiour either in holdyng downe theire heades or in disguysing their attyre. To either of them he gaue their horse, and himselfe mounted vppon a courser the best of all Candramartes stable. In the coole of the evening they tooke their waye to the néerest Citie, where then were many knightes and Ladyes comming out of the Citie to disporte them in the shadowe. Rosicleer being of a comly personage and so lustely mounted praunced forth to be séene, and was well lyked off and praysed amongst them all. As they followed on their iourney toward the gates of the Citie, the king at y^e time came out accōpanyed with his nobilitye to solace himselfe in the fielde as at other times before hee was accustomed. The king rode vpon a mightie horse, with trappings and harnesse most of beaten golde, hys borse being so braue and himselfe so fierce and sterne to looke to that it would haue daunted a right good knighte to haue but spoke to him. So soone as the Princesse, and hir vnckle saw him, they counterfayted the best that they could, and for feare their blood sonke down into their bellies. The valyant Greeke knowing that this was Rolando whome he sought for, as nothing afrayd of his terrible lookes, but rather glad to haue met with him so conueniently, & in the company of so many knights, willed the Princesse & the knight to follow him. So came they al iij. before the king, Rosicleer speaking to him & saying. Mightie king in iustice stay thy horse to heare a poore Ladyes complaynt, & to right the greatest wrong that euer was offered to a gentlewomā. Why she complaineth to thée, is

for that thou art the king and shouldst aboue all men repulse the wrong doer, (so further discouering of the kings duety.) Now the while Rosicleer spake thus, Rolando behelde him very well, lyking both his courage and personage, and albeit of his owne nature he neither feared God nor kept iustice in things which perteyned to hymselfe, yet hearing in Rosicleers discourse, himselfe to bee made on now and then as of a ryghte Judge, and that he woulde not consent to that other then iustice should be executed in his kingdome, he was tickeled therwith, and badde Rosicleer tell on, for hee woulde heare his matter willyngly. Rosicleer strayning his voyce, that what hee sayde might be hearde and noysed abroade, spake as followeth.Knowe you mightie king that the father of thys gentlewoman was Lorde of a great possessions, which marrying with an honourable woman begatte on hir this Lady. Few yeare after his wife deceasing, this Lord marryed also an other woman, by whom he had no childe, after that the Lorde himselfe dyed also, the stepdame remayning on lyue, and shortely marrying with an other man whome in hir husbands dayes she had a lyking to. This man sir king matching with the mother in lawe hath dispossessed the true heire of hir lawfull enheritaunce, insomuch too, as being so disseysed shee hath in no wise bene considered off as such a mans daughter. Nowe séeking hir redresse abroade, it was my chaunce to méete wyth hir, to whome after shee had declared hir case, I made offer for to fighte for hir with anye which impugned hir right. These are therefore to require thée O kninge so to tender hir suite in the honour of iustice, either that she may lawfully enioye hir owne, or that you authorise the lystes, that the conquerour may enter by a lawfull meane.So Rosicleer ended, expectinge the kynges aunswere, who neither warily nor aduisedly waying the vnderstan-

ding the drifte and purpose of this parable aunswered. Sir knight thy demaunde is iust, and the knighte which hath done this wronge cannot chuse but take the one of the two, therefore tell me who thou art and I will send for him to aunswere thy challenge. But it was the kinge hath spoken it sayde Rosicleer. And know for truth that the knight which hath done this iniurye is thy selfe: the gentlewoman which receiued it is the Princesse Arguirosa which heere standeth by me the lawfull enheritour as thy selfe knoweth of this kingedome: thou without iuste title hast intruded vppon it: therefore doe that which thy mouth hath witnessed to be iust. When Rosicleer had sayd, Rolando much amased at his greate presumption, and not beinge able to bridle his choller aunswered despitefully.Thou foolish & vnhappy knight, how hath so great madnes entred into thee, as to appeare before me with such a demaunde, that were it not for the sentence which I haue giuen, I would ere this haue abated thy pryde: but I will not keepe long from thee the rod of due correction, I am content to take the battayle, and with the condicions which thou hast named harde enough I warrant thee for thy selfe and that woman whome I will so cage vp that she shall no more seeke such knights as thou art. When the kinge had thus sayde hee wente on his waye, and all those which hearde the demaund of Rosicleer were much abahed at his boldnesse, for though he was bigge yet semed he nothing so stronge as to resist Rolando, presently it was publyshed throughout the whole citie, and the battayle was appoynted to be on the morrow, where you shoulde haue seene most parte of the towne praye to God for the ryght of their naturall Queene, many scaffoldes were erected to see the lysts.The auncient knight vnckle to the Princes was called Alberto, and he had a nephewe a strong and lustye knighte, dwellyng a mile from the Cittie in a Castell of

his owne, whence he seldome departed for feare of the king. Thether dyd the vnckle of the Princesse for that night carry them, where they were receiued gladly & tooke their rest.¶ The battaile which Rosicleer had with Rolando. Cap. 48.ROlando made no account that night of the battayle which he was to fight the next day, for he thought no harme could happen to him though there had bene ten more such knightes as his aduersary was. The days béeing come he arose and armed himselfe, where enquiring whether the knight his aduersary were in fielde or no, it was tolde him, yea, wherefore he made the more hast, and comming to the listes with a troupe of armed knightes, for his more honour he defied the knight of Cupid, for so was Rosicleer then called of y^e deuice which he bare: the kinges woordes were to this effect. Tell me now foolish knoight, doest thou not repent thy yesterdayes challenge, wouldest thou not giue much not to bée héere nowe: whereto Rosicleer. No assuredly I repent mée not, for if thou vanquish me I looke for naught but death, which I set so light by as in so right a quarrell, I would not venture my life xx. times, but thou oughtest rather to repent thy selfe, and to haue remorse of thy ill dealinge. Rolando heard him say so & began to laugh aloude. Art thou (sayth he) become a Philosopher? who wantinge strength of armes to purchase honour, when they lye striking themselues on theyr couches can talke gallantly, which they account for as great a glory. Thou trusts more I perceyue in thy tongue philosophy then in a chiualry or manhoode, and yet to be spoken off after thy iust punishment, thou wilt dye forsooth in defence of iustice. But if death in such a quarrel be so acceptable, prepare thy selfe for it, for thou shalt stay no longer then y^e proofe of my

speare. So saying Rolando tourned the raines of his horse to tkae the carryer. The meane whyle that the Judges were placed on their bench, and that the Quéene wyth hir Ladyes had taken the windowes to beholde the battaile. The Princesse Arguirosa sat vpon hir palfray all heauy, and onely accompanyed with Alberto, for none els durst make any coūtenaunce of wel meaning towardes hir for feare of y^e king: but to our matter, these two knights putting their spurs to their horses w^t their speares in their rests, ran together, & with their force the earth shooke & their spears burst in sunder. The king in y^e midst of y^e carryer being borne vpō his croupper, & Rosicleer not moued at all, saue that his horse peautrels burst with the rushing, and both knightes lighted downe, where began a fierce battaile on foote, eyther laying at other so thick that their shéeldes were burst in péeces, and themselues so weryed that either followed the other staggering and not certeyne of his gate. The beholders of the battayle were much amazed at Rosicleer, and at the daunger wherein he put the king, but if any meruayled, much more did Rolando which both felt it & could iudge what terrble shakes he had borne both on horse and foote, & he thought in himselfe neuer to haue met with like knight one or other, man or Gyant: Euer Rosicleers nimblenesse helped him much, for he could steppe easily aside and escape the blowe, but Rolando found a want of his horse for he was so heauy that he could not auoide one blowe. At length starke tyred, his bones akeing for very paine of trauaile, he would haue taken breath, but fearing to make hys aduersary priuie thereto, he forced himselfe quickly to kill or be killed, and heaping his blowes vppon Rosicleer, he so galde him that the lookers on mistrusted Roscileers partie. But would he or not (Rosicleer enduring the vtermost,) Rolando was faine to gyue ouer, whereat Rosicleer though not hauing so much néede, yet not to take so foule on did the like.They two leaning their brestes vpon the pommelles of their swoords behelde eath other a longe whyle, where Rolando thincking it not best so to ende the matter, but to take it vp some other way, spake to Rosicleer, saying. I had not thought knight that so muche courage had bene in thée, and yet ere the ende it will little further thee agaynst mee, but for that I am gyuen to loue and like of such knights as thou art I wyll vse clemency towardes thee, which I neuer determined to doe towards one which hath so much offended mée. This it is, I will that thou leaue of the battaile which thou hast in hande, for the Princesse Arguirosa, and from thencefoorth that thou abide in my court where I will doe thée that honour which thy person meriteth, & I will bestowe a liuing vpon thee wherewith thou shalt lyue contentedly. Rosicleer heere well perceyuing what he went about, sayd vnto him. I would willingly Rolando that as thou hast in shewe offered me great honour, for the which I thancke thee, so that thou wouldest in deede performe an other thing which should be lesse empayre to my present honour then y^e leauing of y^e battaile: the battaile as thou sayest would I gladly end, not onely for mine owne daunger which I am like to be in, but for thy sake whome I rather wish to amend his fault by liuing and restoring the Lady to hir owne, then by dying in a wrong cause to hazard the vtter perdition of thy soule. And for truth take this that I will choose to die rather then to suffer hir cause to be left by my collusion. Take therefore some other meanes to leaue this battaile, for this wil not succede, or let vs fight it out for I hope in God that he wyll defend the innocent. When Rosicleer had sayde this, Rolando thincking that his owne gentle speach had made his enimy more bolde, became mad outright, and forgetting hys wearinesse tooke his swoorde with both his handes, and therewith he strake Rosicleer so hard on the headpeece, y^t he made boowe both handes, and knees vnto the ground.

The blow being so heauy as if a tower had fallen vpon him. Rosicleer rising vp acquited it him, that he made him stagger fiue or sixe paces backward. And betwéene them the combat was renued. Now this especially refreshed the poore Princesse Arguirosa, that hir knight troubled hir enimy more now then at the beginning. And not long after it was apparaunt that Rosicleer had the better, for Rolando began to be wery, and coulde not moue out of his place. Rosicleer knowing the auadntage, and willing to ende the battaile the sooner both for the contentment of the Princesse and the safetie of Rolandos life, whome he iudged to be a valiaunt knight, offered agayne the conditions before mentioned. But it was not Rolandos good hap, and true it is that those which liue so wickedly, dye commonly as desperatly least they should repente their faultes and finde mercy: But Rolando more then madde at the courtesie which was offered hym, woulde heare naught but stroke at Rosicleer with all hys force, Rosicleer stept aside and the swoord fell vpon the ground stickynge vp to the hyltes. The whiles that Rolando haled at his swoord Rosicleer discharged his blowe with great strength and cut the necke in sunder from the body. Wherewithall the whole multitude showted, but in diuers tunes some for the sorrowe of the Tyrants death, and most crying. Liue thou Arguirosa our Quéene and Lady. Then albeit some of the kinges friendes woulde haue auenged hys death, they durst not signifie it the people béeing so bent after the newe Quéene. The knight of Cupid when the battayle was ended thancked God and demaunded of the Iudges whether ought else were to be performed for the restoring of the Princesse Arguirosa to hir kingdome. To which all sayde no, and the trumpettes sounded. Yet sat the Princesse vpon hir palfray tyll there came to hir of the most principall knightes, and other Citizens, which now all feare set aside durst discourer their good affection.The Princesse therewith, and the knight of Cudid, with hir vnckle Alberto rode in great honour to the pallace, where that present day y^e princesse was crowned Queene, the chiefe lordes kissing hir hand in the name of y^e gentlemen & commons After this there was no talke but of y^e marriage of the Queene, euery man as he wished, naming the knight of Cupid, which hir selfe more desired then they all, but knowing that the knight of Cupid had else where bestowed his likeing (which she gathered by likelihood of speaches which she had heard in the shyp, by the déep sighes which he hourely fetched, and especially by his deuice which did not argue in a new beginner) she ruled hir passion the best she might, and for this time moued hym not therein, afterwardes she sent for Rolandos wife hir mother in lawe to kéepe hir company, but the roporte was that for anguish of minde she had slayne hir selfe. Well, yet she commaunded them both to be entered as belonged to the kings and Queenes of that land. Rosicleer remained in that kingdone sixe dayes at the greate entreaty of the Quéene to helpe all thinges to good order. After féeling the wound which sat more déeply imprinted in his heart, then the Image thereof in his armour, he departed thēce. And so let vs leue him to recoūt of the Emperour Trebatio and the knight of the Sunne who were lost sayling vpon the Sea.¶ The Emperour Trebatio and the knight of the Sunne are in their waye to the kingdome of Hungary. Cap. 49.THE Emperour Trabatio and the Knight of the Sunne departing from the Ilande of Lyndaraza, were left saylynge in the Sea Euxino. Nowe the shyppe wherin he was hauing so good and skilfull a gouernour as wee haue tolde you, was carryed so swiftly that within two daies they entred y^e mouth of Danubia,

and béeing vpon the ryuer thrée dayes and thrée nightes, the fourth day in the morninge they were set on lande ere that they wist. The Emperour lookinge about him knewe the countrey very well since he had followed the charriot to the selfe same place. And béeing glad to haue arriued to Hungary so safe and so shortly, he embraced the knight of the Sunne for ioye, telling hym that this was Hungary where the Princesse Briana liued. So he deuised with him in what manner he might best make himselfe known to y^e princesse, & conuay hir into Greece. The knight of the Sunne béeing so friendly asked his aduice, aunswered as faythfully. My Lord it is requisite for vs first of all to knowe where the kinge Tiberio is, and in what order the princesse nowe abideth, which being done you may the better compasse that whiche you purpose. You say right well, aunswered the Emperour, let vs kéepe along the shoare, that if perhapes we méete with any one, we may enquire what newes there are. So on foote they walked through a Forest leading vppon the ryuer, wherein they trauayled halfe a day without méeting any one, after somewhat wearied they sate them downe to rest themselues, where they fed on such viandes as they had brought with them from the boate, an halfe, houre after then they had rested indifferently, they sawe néere at hand a gentlewoman vpon a palfraye making as much hast as she could, and after hir a knight on foote with a naked swoorde threateninge hir if shée stayed not, when he ouertooke hir to runne hir throughe. The gentlewoman séeing the Emerour and the knyght of the Sunne lept from hir palfray, crying out: succour mée good knights for thys trayterous knight wyll rauish mée. The Emperour rose vp, & comforting the gentlewoman, stayed a while till the knight came to laye hands on hir, then he sayd, sir knight either let this gentlewoman alone or tell vs why thou wilt carry hir against hir wyll. The knight which was both proude and peeuish, aunswe-

red him, I will carry hir away maugre your teeth, and I haue no charge to make you other aunswer, but as to the cause, witte you that it is for my selfe and for no other, wherof you shal be no let I warrant you. But you carrie hir not away, sayde the Emperour, for sooner shall you die then touch hir honour. The knight thus ouerawed in woords thought to make amendes in deedes, and sodeinly he hit the Emperour vnder the ribbes. The Emperour to yelde it him agayne, strake at his head which hée receiued in his sheelde, and not daring to abide an other, hee fled through the forest as fast as he might, neither the Emperour nor the knight of the Sunne would followe him, but demaunded of the gentlewoman why that knight prusued hir.Alas my Lordes sayd she, my fellowe and I came ryding through the forest where we were met with foure knightes which would haue carryed vs awaye by force, my selfe fledde this way, my companion an other, and but if you doe helpe hir, these wicked knyghtes will doe hir villany. The Emperour hauing alone begun the battayle, desired the knight of the Sunne to abyde there. The while he tooke the gentlewomans palfray to succour the other Lady. The knyght of the Sunne woulde rather haue taken that trauayle vpon him, then to expecte the report but not to importunate the Emperour, he promised to stay his comming or to followe hym. The Emperour tooke vp the gentlewoman behinde him to conduct on the way, & being brought by hir to the midst of y^e forest about a flight shot, they heard y^e scriehing of some gentlewoman, & following y^t soūd they finde iiij knights laying hands vpon a gentlewoman, whereat she cryed out. The Emperour presently as he saw dismounted frō his horse, & cryed to y^e knights saying, knights let this gentlewoman alone for it is great villany to force a woman. One of them hearing the Emperour, cryed agayne. Who made you a Justice or doe you looke for an attournyes fee,

and they all thrée layde at the Emperour, but it had ben better for them not to haue bene so hasty, for ere long they receiued iust reward for their insolencie. For the Emperour cleaued one of them to the scull, and one other from the shoulders downeward, the thirde as hee made hast to escape was taken shorter by the legges. For the Emperour albeit very inclinable to any reasonable pitie, yet was in this poynt very rigorous, not to spare the dishonourers of virginitie, his saying was, that it quenched the naturall loue betweene father and mother, sister and brother, betweene kiffe and kinne: that the bastard broode seldome came to good purpose: that it was partly the sinne of Sodomy, &c. And for his owne fault it was in deed meere ignoraunce or rather constraint, & ther by the more pardonable, or perhaps y^e detesting of it himselfe made him more seuerely exact the kéeping of chastitie in others: But forward with our matter: the emperour beholding this gentlewoman whome he had succoured, knew hir presently to be Clandestria a gentlewomā belonging to y^e Princesse Briana, wherewith he was the gladdest man in the world, as hopyng to heare some good newes at hir hands. Yet to couer himselfe he made the gentlewomen sit downe, hymselfe sitting by them, & to tell hym whether they went, & wherefore they were in those partes. The gentlewomen glad and fayne that they might without daunger tell of what countrey they were, and what theyr erraunt was thetherward, aunswered.Syr knight we are belonging to the Princesse Briana daughter to the king of thys land: the cause of our comming is that long time agaone our Lady lost hir husband the prince Edward prince of Britaine. & neuer since heard of him. For his sake shée hath remayned a widow in the monastery of the ryuer, demeaning a very sorry lyfe, and pent vp in a religious cloyster. Hir beliefe was alwayes that he was dead tyll within these fiftene

dayes she dreamed that she sawe him alyue, and that hee came by Sea to this lande, very merry, of the same age which he was off when he first lefte hir, which dreame she hath dreamed three nights together, the last night of the three there appeared to hir an auncient man much rebuking hir for hir distrust, whereat the Princesse though hardlye perswaded, yet being to admonished, the better hath credited that night vision, and hath sent vs to a relygious house, dedicated to our Lady the blessed Virgin, with rich offerings and many good deuotions for his safe retourne Whence after we were retourning by this forrest these knights besette vs, and had rauished vs but that we cryed so loude that you hearde vs, and you haue thancks be to God, well eased vs of them, and for your so great courtesie, if it so please you to ride with vs, I doubt not but our mistresse will well consider you. The Emperour much reioycing at the great constancie of hys wife Briana, and desiring to discouer himselfe, asked the gentlewomen if any of them had séene the Prince Edward or no. Whereto Clandestria aunswered. Yea sir knight very wel, and I woulde that God woulde once shew him me, I should know him by his louely face, excellyng al other knights which I haue euer séene I wyll sée that presently sayd the Emperour, and so saying hee put off his helmet: and how now sayth hee, whome take you me for. I say they both, your selfe are Prince Edward & knéeling down before him would haue kissed his hands & they earnestly entreated him to go wtih thē to y^e monasterie of y^e riuer. The Emperour consented gladly. For I haue sayth he as great desire to sée hir, but heere not farre hence there is a knighte which stayeth for me, him must we séeke and carry in our company, for he is the manne next vnto God, to whome I am most beholding, for by him haue I bene deliuered from prison and from enchauntment. The whole storye I wyll tell you by the waye.So the Emperour made the gentlewomen to mount vppon their palfrayes, and himselfe tooke one of the horses pertayning to the dead knight for himselfe, and an other for the knight of the Sun and by y^e way he discoursed as he promised of his owne estate with Lindaraza till that they mette with the Knighte of the Sunne, with whome the Emperour communicated of his good aduenture to lyght vppon Briana maydes, and what newes he had hearde of them. Whereat the Knight of the Sunne became as ioyous, and they made a merry iourney towardes Belgrado, which helde them foure dayes trauaile from that place.¶ The Emperour and the Knight of the Sunne riding towards the monasterie of the riuer are by an aduenture seperated. Cap. 50.THe Emperour in the waye declared to the gentlewomen and to the knight of the Sunne who he was, not Prince Edward as they thoughte, but in his name Brianas bridegrome, and so forth of that matter, which you may conceiue by that you heard before. Whereat the gentlewomen were not a lyttle amazed, but nothing sorye. And with the knighte of the Sunne the Emperour entred into farther counsayle in what order he might make the king Tiberio priuie to his facte, and carrye the Princesse Briana into Greece. Whereto the Knight of the Sunne counsayled thus. My Lorde, you knowe the fayth of a Prince, a bonde verye strayght for kings and great Lordes, as touching the preseruation of theire honour in promise, for which many times many haue preferred the turst layde vpon them before the safetie of their neere kinred. Thys I saye for that peraduenture Tiberio wilbe right glad to haue matched his daughter with you, yet for the Prince Edwards sake comming vnder his safe conduct he maye not take it

in good part, or if hee did, hadde not king Oliuerio iust cause to be angry being so abused as vnder his worde to to haue lost his sonne, and subiects withall, my counsaile is therefore for the better dispatch of your businesse, and auoyding of being shent if you venture rashly vppon an enemy not reconciled. That you go secretly to the monasterie and carry away the Princesse from thence, scarce letting hir selfe know whether you shall go, saue that behinde you you may leaue a letter which shall signifie the whole effect of that which is passed.  By this meanes if the king of England bewayle the death of his sonne, the king Tiberio may complayne of the losse of his daughter and in time when these sores are skinned, there maye friendshippe be made on either part. The Emperour liked well this counsayle, and giuing him many thanckes tolde him that he would put it in effect. So two dayes they kept company nothing in the meane time happening worth the telling.The thirde day comming to a crosse waye well frode they sawe a pauilyon pitched and not farre off twelue gentlewomen clothed in blacke, and hauing verye sadde countenaunces, at the tente dore they sawe thrée knights which were their kéepers. When the Emperour and the Knighte of the Sunne approched, the gentlewomen cryed out, whereat the Knight of the Sunne stayde, and spake vnto them. Gentlewomen, aswell by your countenaunces and by your outcryes wee perceiue you are distressed. Show vs now the cause thereoff, and if the thing be such as that we may remedye it we will doe our best to doe it.One of the chiefest of them answered. Sir your courteous words makes vs y^e bolder to vtter our griefe. Therfore know you that I haue a sister called Elisandra Duchesse of Pannonia, and marryed to a knight the most wicked man that was euer borne, for he hath slaundered hir with such a misreport as the lyke hath not bene heard off.

So it is that my sister and hée haue bene marryed eyghte yeares and haue had no children, wherefore he fearinge y^t after hir decease the Dukedome should retourne to hyr kinne, as by right it would being hir onely enheritaunce, and minding to establish the state in his owne name, hath suborned a desperate person to challenge hir of adultery. By which meanes she being executed as false to hir husbande all hir lands and goods are forfayted to the husband as it were to make him amendes of his wiues wronge. Now this sclaunder is apparant to all men, but bicause the Duke offereth that the combatte shalbe graunted to him which shall gaynsay the slaunder, the matter is made the lykelyer, and is borne out though not by strong hande yet by pollycy, and yet no man dare oppose himselfe to the challenger. For there is a knight in the lande called Arydon Lord of y^e blacke wood by reporte y^e strongest knight which euer was in these parts, albeit very lyke vnto the Duke in his ill lyuing, him hath the Duke made hys friende and accuser of the Princesse. For a plot of ground adiacent to his segniories, his accusation lyeth thus that with himselfe she committed adultery, whereas thoughe he was a long soiourner in hir court, yet he neither perswaded hir to it, nor woulde euer moue hir in it, for hée knewe his aunswere. But the matter was thus canuased, the while the Duke kepte at he courte of the kynge Tiberio, thether word is brought of the false packing of the Duchesse and Arydon. The Duke presently complaineth to the king, & both partyes are sent for in all hast. Arydon being first asked confesseth it, and is acquitted by his confession. As (by the way) our lawe in this case acquiteth the man once confessing it though otherwise neuer so great an offender, and onely stretcheth to the woman in respect of hir faythe giuen at marriage. Nowe what coulde the Princesse doe standing before the kinge and accused not hearesay, but by himselfe with whom she is sayde to haue lyen? yet denyeth she it. Well, the

Duke charging hir with it and she purging hir selfe, she was fayne to require respite for prouiding a sufficient knight to maintayne hir innocency. Yet was she commaunded to prison vnder sure kéepinge, and there is a day set for the tryall, Arydon being the accuser, agaynst whome I doe not thincke that anye man in hir defence, though the cause be righteous dare shewe himselfe, for we haue tarryed héere these xx. dayes and haue not found any. Now bicause héere are crossewayes, in which it is lykely that many knights should passe, we determyne to abide the rest of the prefixed time. And this is the cause sir knight why we mourne, and so she ended weping bitterly.The Emperour and the Knight of the Sunne pitied them much, meruaylyng so vngodly dealyng could haue any place to rust in Hungary, but God is wise say they yea, and séeth his time. So the Knighte of the Sunne talking apart with the Emperour sayd to him. My Lord you sée good cause binding me to pittie the Duchesse in hir extreame néede, if you be pleased therewith, I wyll go aunswere for hir in the court of kyng Tiberio. In the meane time it will be best for you to go to the monasterie of the riuer the most secretly that you may, and I will not fayle to certefie you from the courte if I heare ought which might auaile you being known. This being done, I will with Gods helpe come to Greece, where I looke to finde you very merry. The Emperour was loth, but séeing the vrgent necessitye he was content and aunswered, y^t he would not be agaynst his pleasure althoughe it woulde grieue him to be long without his companye, but at Constantinople shall we méete.Therevppon the knighte of the Sunne tourned to the gentlewomen, saying. Gentlewomen, your morning hath so much grieued this knight and me, that although his affaires lye otherwhere and that he cannot be present, yet for his sake will I go with you to the courte, ther to

aunswere for the Duchesse if she be so content. The gentlewomen willyngly accepted of the knight, and not staying longer but to thancke him they pulled downe theire tent and to horsebacke they go. By the way he had much talke with Elisea for so was the Duchesse sister named, he comforting hir and shee requested him to make spéede for wee lacke, not many dayes of our appoynted time, when if wee fayle we shall lose a good cause for lacke of pitye in knightes aduenturous. But lette vs leaue this and tourne we to the Emperour in the companye of Brianas gentlewomen.¶ The Emperour Trebatio came to the monasterie of the riuer & there was made known to his wife the Princesse. Cap. 51.THe Emperour hauing good hope to méete with the Princesse whom he loued no lesse then before he had, when he hazarded his person for hir sake vppon Prince Edward, made greate hast, and hee trauayled with the gentlewomen thrée dayes and thrée knights. Now we haue tolde you often that that the Princes loding was in one quarter of the monasterie seperate from y^e other, wherto she had a posterne gate towards the wood, but which Clandestria had carryed Donzel del Febo & Rosicleer to nursing, & by this gate no man either entred or went out, but by Clandestrias leaue, shee was groome porter and kepte the key hir selfe. And for to couer this matter which the Emperour would in wise haue known it was very fit y^t CLandestria was ther in company. For when they approched y^e monasterie saith Clandestria. My Lord if you will not be known by y^e gentlewomen héere belonging to our Lady, best it were that I should first enter % see what they do, & that I should cause the Princesse to take hir most secret chamber, where as I shall finde hir so I will declare

of your comming, otherwise it maye be that your so soddayne approch might worke some alteration in hir bodye to the daunger of hir health she being so sore weakened by continual mourning, but this night shal passe & the morrow you shal come vnto hir. The Emperour lyked well of Clandestrias speach, and so he stayed in a place which she prouided for him, the whilest that the gentlewomen went to the Princesse. Some will thinke that the Emperour shoulde be much chaunged this being the xx. yeare of his absence, but it was not so, for when he first enrred the Castle of Lyndaraza he was but xxxv. yeares in age, and no more was he when he came from the enchauntment, neither his age encreasing, nor his beautie decreasing. When the Emperour lefte the Princesse Briana, she was but xiiii. yeares olde, and counting the time that she had liued afterward she was iust one yere vnder him wherein hir beautie best appeared, and the great sorrowe which she before had taken did not so abate hir coloure, but that the ioy of his retourne fetched it agayne more fresh and lyuely then it was before.But the story saith that the gentlewomen found their mistresse alone prayinge deuoutlye vppon hir knées, and more merry then she was before, whether by inspiration or by immagination, conceiuing hope in the dreame I tolde you off: but hir gentlewomen were very gladde to be witnesses of hir mirth. The Princesse louingly welcommed the gentlewomen especially Clandestria which was hir sure friende, demaunding of them how they had sped in their iourney.Clandestria aunswered.. Madame, wee were once in daunger too loose bothe our honoures and oure lyues after that wee hadde done as you commaunded vs. Ah blessed Virgin sayde the Princesse, and is it possible that you shoulde euer be in so greate daunger for my crause. Yea it is most certine madame

answered Clandestria, but as after a fowle euening coms a faire morning, so after this trouble we had some quyetnesse by the meanes of our flight, for we mette with a good knight, which not onely saued vs from great shame by killyng these wicked knightes which woulde haue spoyled vs, but after tolde vs suche newes as you haue cause to be the gladdest woman in the worlde. He sayd that not manye dayes before hee departed from youre husband, which was in good health, and of the same age as he was when you first knewe him, for since hee was with you, he hath bene enchaunted, and being now set at comming to you.O good Lorde, and is it possible sayde the Princesse that thou art so fauourable vnto me, as to sende mee my husbande alyue: or is this some dreame the farther to encrese my dolour. Tell me Clandestria in good faythe, is it trewe which thou sayst, for I can hardly beléeue thée. Yea assuredly sayde Clandestria for the knight which reported it, is so credible as that he will not tell other then troth. Ah Clandestria sayde the Princesse thou hast bene alwayes dilygent, discréete, and lyberall in those thinges which haue touched my seruice hetherto, but in this now concerning my lyfe especially thou hast bene neglygent or hast wanted discretion. For why didst thou not bringe him before me that my selfe might haue hearde it of his owne mouth, would it not then haue bene pleasaunt vnto me to haue séene that knighte which so lately sawe my louing husband: and to haue knowen of him in what manner he mette with him, and for what cause he commeth not so soone as the other.Madame be not agrieued with this sayde Clandestria for the knight which tolde it me is not so farre hence but that within a quarter of an houre you may sée him if you haue desire thereto. Desire sayde the Princesse, I desire nothing so much in the world, therefore go and fetch him before me, that I may knowe whether that be true

which my heart thincketh so incredible, I wyll goe my wayes sayde Clandestria, and so she went out of the Princesse lodginge and straight to the Emperour to whom she tolde all that talke which shée had had wyth hir Lady, whereat the Emperour was so gladde that vp the stayers full faine hée goeth, and by such priuie waies as none but Clandestria knewe, hée is brought before Briana. Clandestria first entering, then the Emperour clothed in rich armour and hys visour pulled downe. The Princesse was somewhat afrayde to sée so bygge a man all armed, but the Emperour pullinge off hys helmette quickly shewed hys louely face, the whiche shee had imprinted in hir remembraunce. And wyth hasty paces hée made towardes the Princesse, whome hée kyssed on the mouth so swéetly that their tongues this while were slent, not to interrupt the ioye of theyr first méeting. Anone after the Princesse whiche in déede had the chiefest wrong spake to the Emperour thus:My Lorde and onely lyfe what cruell Fortune hath detayned you from this lande, and bannished you so long from my presence. In what straunge and hydden countryes haue you bene that we coulde neuer heare woorde of you. Madame, aunswered the Emperour, you may call that Fortune cruell, for it hath offered you a great wronge by forceing you to endure a farre greater penaunce then Penelope dyd by Vlysses absence: but one thinge you maye assure your selfe of that the fault was not in mée thoughe I am not to bée excused, for it I had had lyfe and lybertie and iudgement, all the world should not haue stayed me from you.Since my fréedom if I haue not had as loyall a regarde of your constancye and my duetie, then blame all mankinde for my sake of vnstedfastnesse and wronge, and for this tyme let these things slippe wyth lesse

griefe to entertayne our present ioye. So he kyssed the Princesse agayne, and they both satte downe together kissing and collinge eache other lyke two younge louers, when they were throughly entered thys delyght, and that the Emperour was sure of hir good lykinge towardes himselfe, whosomeuer hée were he bewrayed to hir the whole matter, first that he was not the Prince Edward as shée thought, but the Emperour Trebatio, and so in fewe woordes he tolde hir the whole storye of hys first heate by the prisoners confession, and from thence in order to thys delyueraunce wrought by the knight of the Sunne.The Princesse for a greate while stoode héereat amazed and began to gather more of the woordes whiche Rosicleer had written to hir, and not béeinge displeased with hir former errour, in the ende shée tolde him that whosomeuer he was in déede, yet was hee the same to whome she was marryed, and that vowe which shée then made, she sayd she woulde performe to hym alone. The Emperour courteously thanckinge hir, badde hyr saye on what had happened, whereat she graciouslye blussinge, tolde him that she had bene deliuered of two children at one burthen béeing two goodly boyes with straunge markes in their bodies. Of them shée tolde hym farther, powring downe many a teare the manner of their losse, the one called Donzel del Febo at three years of age, the other named Rosicleer at seuentene, and for Rosicleer (sayth shee) hée hathe proued a ryght manly knight, and therewith she gaue him the letter which Arinda had brought.The Emperour read the letter and was very gladde to heare of that hope which Artemidoro had put hym in a touchinge the recouery of hys brother. And in good time while we haue occasion to entreat off Trebatios children, let vs holde on wyth the knyght of the

Sunne, whom we left in the way trauailing to the court of king Tiberio, which shall be declared in the chapter following.¶ The Knight of the Sunne, ridinge to the court of king Tiberio, iusteth with a knight for passage. Cap. 52.THE Knight of the Sunne and the gentlewomen with their knightes rydde towardes the Citie of Ratisbona where the kinge Tiberio and his court for that tyme laye. Thrée dayes almost they trauayled hearynge of naught that myght be tolde you tyll towardes noone vppon the thirde daye they mette wyth a fayre gentlewoman vppon a palfraye whiche saluted them courteously in thys manner. God saue you Sir knyghtes, I praye you tell me whether you are going, to the court of the kinge Tiberio or no, for if you goe thether I haue certeine newes to tell you.Mary sayd one of the knyghtes that we doe, what do you commaunde vs thether fayre gentlewoman, I wyll tell you that willingly sayth shee if the knight whiche hath the deuice of the Sunne will graunt me my asking. I graunt it you gentlewoman aunswered the knight of the Sunne, if it bee neither let to my iourney nor preiudiciall to my person. I am content wyth these conditions sayth shee, and so I accept of your promise.Nowe Sir knight trueth it is that riding thys waye I must of force passe ouer a bridge stretchinge ouer Danubia not passinge two myles from the greate citie of Ratisbona, ouer which you must also passe if you would goe to the citie. Thys bridge sayth she is kept

by a knyght called Florinaldes for the loue of a Lady named Albamyra equally beloued of two knyghtes, The one is this Florinaldes, the other is an Earle named Orfeo, and they two haue bene at longe strife for hir loue. She to bee rydde of the one, shée careth not whether hath commaunded that in hir presence they should seuerally kéepe thys passage fiftéene dayes space, promising that he which doth best shall bée hir knyght, Florinaldes hathe bene the first and hath kepte thys bridge twelue dayes in Albamyras presence, where are many knightes and gentlewomen. Nowe it beeing so néere the courte there come daylye many good knightes to proue themselues, but hee hathe the masterye of them all, and hys prayse is spredde farre abrode.This morninge my selfe rydinge towardes Ratisbona for certeyne businesse I haue there woulde haue passed the bridge, but I coulde not bée suffered excepte I woulde haue confessed Albamyra to bee the fayrest Lady in all Hungary. Thys if I woulde not doe, they badde mée bringe some knight that shoulde wynne the passage for mée, when I heard thus I called to sée the beautie of Albamyra, that I myght iudge whether it were so or no. Then was I ledde into a riche tent wherein Albamyra satte accompanyed wyth many gentlewomen, and I behelde hir at the full, but truely if my glasse at home lye not, wherein I was wont to sée myne owne beautye, hyrs is nothinge equall to myne. So I tolde them that for ought I had séene I muste bee fayne to retourne backe and to finde a knight whiche would breake the passage.Nowe the gyfte whiche I demaunde of you Syr knyght is, that héerevppon you iuste wyth Florinaldes, and in the maintenaunce of my beautie agaynst hirs, be you assured of the victory.When the gentlewoman had said thus, those that were

present laughed a good, and the knight of the Sunne to shift hir off, aunswered. Gentlewoman if your businesse had bene so great to the court as you woulde haue vs thincke, you would not haue stayed for so small a matter. The gentlewoman very angry replyed shortly. Call you it so small a matter, marke what I saye, you are not so courteous as I tooke you for, if you so little estéeme womens sutes, you béeing a knight, nowe know you that a woman estemeth hir beautie aboue al, and that there is no iniury so great for a woman, as to say that an other is fayrer then shee: I tell you that I had rather be called any other name of reproch, then not a well fauourd woman, and beeing as I am I account my selfe much fairer then Albamyra, or rather would I all my greate businesse vndone, then to confesse that which the knyght of the bridge doth will me too. Nowe sith you haue gyuen me this graunt, performe it or otherwise during my lyfe I will complayne me of you. The knight of the Sunne and those which were with him laughed to see the gentlewoman so hot for the light regardinge of his beautie, and they sayd, sigh we must passe the bridge wée will see the beautie of Albamyra, and if it be lesse then yours then will we doe our best that you shall passe vncontrolled.Of the one part be you sure quoth y^e gentlewoman that my beautie is more, and if I had the maintenaunce which Albamira hath, Florinaldes or the Earle Orfeo would rather quarrell for my beautie then for hyrs. At thys and other lyke thinges they laughed tyll they came to the bridge where they sawe a bigge knyght armed, and a fayre riche tente pytched, with certeine knightes and gentlewomen walkinge by the ryuer side, who so soone as they sawe these knighes come, gathered vnto the tent.The knight of the Sunne and hys company offered to ryde ouer the bridge, but there came a gentlewoman

out agaynst him, saying. Sir knight this bridge is defended you by Florinaldes, ouer may you not passe vnless you iuste wyth him or confesse that Albamyra is the fayrest gentlewoman in thys kyngdome, and that Florinaldes is the knight which best deserueth hir, the which also must these gentlewomen saye which are in your company or bring knightes to aunswere for them. Wee could be content, aunswered the knyght of the Sunne to agrée to these conditions which you speake off, but the gentlewomen in our company make such account of their beauties that they wyll rather retourne backe, then confesse that which you woulde. Nowe that they are in our company wée muste aunswere for them. Determine what to doe, and for your choice, it must bee one of those two, sayd the gentlewoman, and so she departed.Florinaldes and Albamyra hearde all this, and presently they caused the tent doore to bée set open, where these straungers sawe Albamyra amongest the gentlewomen much excelling them all, whiche made them take vp a freshe laughter at their merry gentlewomen. Florinaldes issued foorth of the tent taking a speare in hys hande and comming towardes the knight, he spake saying. You haue knowne already knightes that this bridge is kept by mée, if you saye not that which I demaund of you, or otherwyse presently iust with mée. The knights aunswered, we will doe what we lyke best, and therewyth they required the knight of the Sunne that they might iust first, which he graunted them, and so the one taking a speare in his hande ranne to encounter Florinaldes, but he was vnhorsed, and so the seconde and the thirde all of them as easily and wyth no more a doe then I haue had in telling you.The knyghte of the Sunne séeing these three knyghtes thus cast downe, spake vnto the gentlewoman which had brought them thether. Gentlewoman

thys knyght is no babe you see, were it not better for vs to saye as he sayth, then myght wee goe free. And the rather for that I haue seene Albamyra which in my eyes is much fairer then you.Blessed Mary sayth the gentlewoman. If Albamyra bée fayrer then I, it is for hir apparell onely, but sith you haue promised this, you muste performe it, and althoughe I gaine nothing heerein, yet shall it doe mee good to see you flye from your saddle, for the little skyll you haue in deserning beauties. Albamira hearde this and the other gentlewomen, and knowinge that this was the gentlewomen whiche had bene there before they laughed muche at hir, whereat she waxed angry. The knight of the Sunne then tooke a speare from the ratler and called for Florinaldes. Then ranne they together with such force that they made the bridge to shake. Florinaldes onely burst hys speare vppon the knyght of the Sunne, but the knyght of the Sunne bare Florinaldes ouer and ouer so strongly that hee had a sore bruse and myght not ryse, hys knyghtes tooke him in their armes into hys tent where he was heauy, and it is vncertaine whether more gryeued wyth the sore of his bruse then wyth the shame of hys fall, so to be foyled before his mistresse, but if I maye meddle in schoole poyntes, I thinke he had rather burst an arme then so to haue cracked his credite wyth both Ladye and friendes, such as manye resorte thether from Tiberios court to see him iust.And the knight of the Sunne seeing Florinaldes so vnhorsed before his Lady, was as sorry for hym and presentlye departed. The gentlewomen and theyr knights in whose company he trauailed were glad for the hope gyuen them of a farther triall, but aboue al, y^e gentlewoman which had required hym to these iustes, tryumphed nowe as if rather in hir quarrell, then by the knightes strength, Florinaldes had bene ouerthrowne,

and she bad them aloude to remember the comparison of Albamiras beautie & hirs, from this time she liked much better of hir selfe, but age comming vpon hir, hir beautie decayed, as there is nothing more vncertayne, either empayred by sicknesse, or withered by age, or by sundry accidents in mannes lyfe corrupted and depraued, and what should I talke of the harme that thence issueth. It is at home a bréeder of vnrest, a robber of ease abroade, a continuall care, a cause of many daungers, a sea of trauayles, and an euerlasting griefe whether comminge or goinge: but what néedeth this so long a digression, the rest let vs leaue to those that are ydle, to discourse at leysure, nowe more at large of our necessary matter. The knyght of the Sunne with his company rydeth to Ratisbona, whether they came ere full sunne set, and lodged for that night at a friendes house of Elisea. The storye sayth also that Florinaldes and his company dislodged their tent and came that night to Rotisbona also, all greatly amazed at the knyght of the Sunne to whome Florinaldes bare such an euil wil that it had almost cost him hys lyfe, as the next booke shall tell you héereafter.¶ The knight of the Sunne aunswered before the king Tiberio for the Dutchesse Elisandra, and the battaile was appointed betweene him and Aridon of the black wood. Cap. 53.THe next day béeing come the knight of the Sunne armed himselfe, and béeing ready, onely with Elisea went towardes the pallaice, whether when he came he found the kinge amongest hys nobles, and with them the Duke of Pannonia, and Arydon of the blacke woode, either of them not a little puffed vp wyth vaine glory, that the time prefixed was now spent almost

and no man daring to aunswer for the Duchesse. Now at the comming in of this knighte with the deuice of the Sunne there was sodainly a great silence belyke by occasion of some in the company which had seene his valour proued vppon Florinaldes. And the Knight of the Sunne glad of such cōuenient time of hearing, after he had humbly bowed to the king, spake as followeth. Mightie king I am a knighte and a straunger neither of your courte, countrey, nor relygion: but Fortune casting me vppon this coast, it was my chaunce to méete with this gentlewoman, sister to the Duchesse of Pannonia, whom you holde prisoner. This gentlewoman trauayled to séeke a knight which woulde aunswere the accusation that the Duke hir husband layeth agaynst hir, and lyghting vpon me she hath opened to me the whole trechery and packing of the Duke hir husbande with the periured Arydon of the blacke woode. In the iustifiyng of which woordes spoken by the gentlewoman, and the improuing of Arydons false and shamelesse slaunder, I am hether come to proue that he belyeth the Duchesse vppon his body. The king now and all which were present beheld the Knight of the Sunne very earnestly, and were abashed to sée him being so young to speake so couragiously. Arydon verye angry rose vp, and to the Knight of the Sunne spake on this wise. Sir knight it appeares that thou art bothe young and a straunger in this countrey, for if thou werte of yeares or knewest Arydon which nowe talketh wyth thée, thou wouldst not be so hardy as to defie him in presence, and were it not for the King my Lorde I woulde in some wise tell thée of thy rudenesse, but there néedeth no such hast, I hope I shall haue time inoughe sith thou canst not detract the battayle whereto thy selfe hath first made offer, but lette vs to go to it presently and ende it in this place. Arydons highe disdayne sore displeased the Knight of the Sunne as appeared by his looke, but he refrayned for honour to the king, and for the rest he desired

the king to authorize the lysts. The king aunswered him gently that daye it mighte not be, both for that it was néedefull the Duchesse of Pannonia should appeare openly to put hir quarrell into his handes, and for that also Judges must be ordayned of the fielde, and the lysts erected: which coulde not be prouided in so shorte warning. The knight of the Sunne yelded to the kinges pleasure, and after that he had witnessed his forwardenesse to defende the Duchesse, hee toke his leaue of the king and to his host he goeth. The king as soone as he was gone, but occasion of this young knight, calling to minde his sonne Liriamandro whome he had not hearde off in long tyme, wept bitterly and sayd a loude that diuers hearde it. If my sonne Liriamandro be lyke to this lusty knighte, and haue a care to be notable, no doubt he will excell all his auncestors. Whereat those which were there by declared to the king what themselues had séene of this knight and howe strongly hee had ouerthrowen Florinaldes: which report did in a manner discomfit Arydon, that he would haue wished his stake out at y^e dealing with all his heart, but in déede a very desperate contempt both of God and the worlde brought him to his ende.¶ The battaile betweene the Knight of the Sunne and the strong Arydon. Cap. 54.THe next day the king rose erlier then he was wont to doe, bicause of the battayle which was to be made betwéene Arydon and the knight straunger. And Arydon lykewise made more hast, nor the Knight of the Sun fayled for his parte. When all were in the fielde, the king caused the Duchesse to be brought, which came thether in a mourning wéede and with so sorrowfull a countenaunce that no heart so stony but would haue pityed hir, for shee had bene very fayre alwayes accounted as wise and honest. The king demaunded of hir whether she

would referre the tryall of hir cause to the successe of hir knight whether good or bad, whereto she aunswered yea, and that she had no other helpe but in God and the innocencie of hir cause. So was she ledde to a scaffold prouided for hir and other gentlewomen. The Judges nexte were called for, which were named by the king, the Duke of Austrich & the Duke of Saxony two auncient knights and then resiant in y^e court. The Judges thus placed Arydon and the Knight of the Sunne toke their spears in their hands forcing themselues agaynst each other. Now sounded a trumpette and a herauld cryed. Go to knights and God defende the righte. With this they ranne together with all the force they coulde: theire encountrey was such that Arydon burste his speare and diseased not his enemy, but the knight of the Sunne both burste his speare and vnhorsed Arydon and with the fall hee gaue him, almost burste his backe, while he payned himselfe to keepe the saddle.Arydon thus brused lyfte vp his eyes to heauen and in despaire of conscience murmured to himselfe some like thing. Thou O God as I beleeue hast sent this young man from heauen to reuenge my misreport, otherwyse who is his hee in this worlde which mighte haue sate so quiet in his saddel after so violent a push as I haue giuen him, or who might haue annoyed Arydon so, and with a deperate rage he drew his sworde to haue sheathed it in the knights horse bellye, but y^e knighte descended & with hys sworde before him went toward Arydon y^t betwéene them the battayle beginneth. The king and the Princes ther present were very glad to see so good a beginning of the Duchesse delyuerance. And Arydon fayled not to do his best, that the knight of y^e Sun could not bust take him for a strong knight, the battaile endured a great while no man being able to iudge who had y^e better, til y^e knight of y^e Suns courage grew as his honour encreased for he was not angred at the first. The ende of this battayle

(for it was not long neither very equall) was in this manner, Arydon hitte the knight of the Sunne on the headpéece that he bowed his knées to the grounde. Then the knight of the Sunne gaue him an other that he staggered with it, the seconde time Arydon hitte the knight of the Sunne a blowe vppon the headpéece, whereat the last time the knight of the Sunne stretching himselfe and following his blow, withal his mighte hit Arydon so sure, that Arydon fell vppon the ground mouing neither hand nor foote. The knight of the Sunne thinking it to bée but an amase stoode still while Arydon might recouer agayne.The whilest all the beholders much praysed the knight of the Sunne for the best knight lyuing, as well commending his courage as his actiuitye. The Duchesse Elisandra likewise now hauing some hope by hir knight gate hir colour agayne, and hir ioye was as much as hir husbands sorrowe. But you haue not yet hearde the worst of the wicked Duke, for Aryden reuiued: whom when the knight of the Sunne saw raysing himselfe vp he came hastely and holding the poynt of his sword agaynst Arydons throate he spake saying. Thou shalt dye false Arydon vnlesse thou confese the treason that thou hast deuised agaynst the Duchesse, and if thou doest dye in thys obstinate minde of concealyng so great outrage thou hazardest thy soules health. Arydon as it wer halfe awake, and yet not so loth to die as stroken with a terrour of his owne conscience aunswered. Thy words haue abashed me more then the death which thou threatnest, the faulte which I haue committed hath bredde a greater horroure in my flesh: but make the Judges come néere and I will declare the whole.The knights of the Sunne called the Judges, they comming néere hearde these wordes of his owne mouth, the substaunce of the Dukes shifting to wring his wiues enheritaunce to himselfe, in such manner as you haue

heard in Eliseas report. The Judges strayghtwayes declared it to the king, who detesting theire fact, caused the Duke to be apprehended and both to be executed in that placeFor albeit many of his nobles entreated for their pardon, yet the king so abhorred y^e villany that nought auailed: and at this time was the lawe first enacted in Hungary that the law of punnishment for whoredome should stretche aswell to the man as to the woman, and that equall penaltie should be assinged to lyke offendours, whereas before the men escaped the women onely were in danger. Nowe after this execution, the Duchesse Elisandra was sette at large, and the Quéene Augusta receyued hir with great honour into hir company. The knight of the Sunne was very desirous to leaue the Citie: but the king desired much to knowe him, and to haue hym abide for some time in his court. In the time of his abode the knight of the Sunne grew in more familyar aquaintaunce with the king, and was much lyked of him bycause he séemed to resemble the Princessse Briana, but one day the king importuning the younge knight to knowe his kinred vsed such lyke wordes.Sir knight wee thancke you heartely for the paynes that you haue taken in the Duchesse of Pannonias behalfe and for the maintayning of hir honour, whereby if shée haue receiued commoditie of lyuing and auoyding shame: so haue I receiued some quietnesse in my realme by the open detecting of such malefactours, & their punnishment wilbe occasion of feare in others: for this cause I haue willed you to stay héere, as thereto I pray you heartelye, but I pray you lette me knowe your name and wher you were borne, for I know not how to call you. The knight of the Sunne well nourtered in the Souldans court after his humble thanckes for his Maiesties most gratious proffer and the promise of acceptaunce being a thing in déede very conuenient for the certefiyng of the Emperour

began as followeth. For your maiesties fauour I shall most willyngly doe your highnesse seruice and for the Duchesse I am glad that the equity of hir cause surdered my attempt, and for my name or countrey, I can better tell you the story of my lyfe since I came to yeares then declare that. Yet am I called the Knight of the Sunne by my deuice, and my education hath bene in the Souldans courte at Babilon, thether I being brought by the kings sonne in lawe, the king of Persia when I was but a child and as it hath bene tolde me, found in a lyttle boate vp- the Sea, for my lyfe hetherto it hath bene in armes, and that doe I meane to pursue. The king and those which were with him were greatly amased tha thee had come from so farre a countrey, and had bene founde vppon the Sea, and that he knewe no more of his estate, but they thought that yet he was of some noble birth. The king thancked him and in this order the knighte of the Sunne stayed with the king Tiberio for certeine dayes where he gayned many friends and one onely enemy, by name Florinaldes which could not forgette the shame receiued before his mistresse, although it had done him no scathe: for in the ende Albamira preferred him before the Earle Orfeo. So as I say yet Florinaldes seing the honour of the knight of the Sunne dayly to encrease to the discredite of the borne Hungarian, his stomacke rose agaynst him, and one day he sette vppon the knight of the Sunne at vnawares, but to his owne losse, had not the knight of the Sunne bene more merciful, after they were made friends. But let vs breake off this story to dispath the Prince of Lusitania out of England.¶ Don Siluerio demaunded the Princesse Oliuia for wife of the kyng Oliuerio. Cap. 55.THe great sorrow which the losse of Rosicleer caused in y^e court of y^e king Oliuerio hath bene ere this decla-

red to you for all the good knights his friendes wente to séeke him, leauing the court bare and naked for noble men and aboue all the Princesse Oliuia was worse wringed, albeit hir griefe was not so manifest. Nowe yet there stayed in the court the Prince Don Siluerio straungelie surprised with the loue of Oliuia and vsing the helpe of his sister Rodasylua to the perswading of Oliuia. One day the last I take it he vnfolded his griefe vnto hir, tellyng hir that vnlesse she founde the meanes, hee shoulde héere leaue his lyfe in a farre countrey. The matter is mine olde sute y^t you wot off, my desire is that at least I may be assured of hir good will. Sure I am if I moue the king in it that I shall obtayne. The Princesse Rodasylia moued in déede w^t hir brothers afflictiō promised y^e uttermost of hir paynes, and within a while after she had some talke with the Princesse about that matter, hir wordes tending to lyke effect.Madame you knowe right well the great loue which since I came to this courte I haue borne vnto you, and how I haue done you seruice in al that I was able, that which more is, in what manner I haue absented my selfe from my parents onely to be in your company, which if you know and confesse to be true, you must lykewise beléeue that that which I shall say now, rather procéedeth of good zeale towards your honoure, then of any purpose to worke mine owne contentment, though I cannot deny but that if I obtaine it will content me highly. But I doe not desire the thing which standeth not with your honour, and for my paynes reward seeke I none, but that I may be heard.If I erre in ought wherin I shall counsaile you, then may you blame me, and yet I doubte not but when you shall haue throughly examined the whole, you shall rather impute the faulte to lacke of skill, then to any lacke of good meaning, and as I am certeyne that you haue this same opinion of mee without any farther suspecte, 

so will I tell you my minde flatly. You knowe that you are the onely enheritrix of this kingedome, that your father the king my Lord must néedes marry you with such a one as may equall your estate, both for the naturall care which he hath ouer you in respect that you are his daughter, and for the profit which shall thereby redounde to his subiects, which cannot be well gouerned, the seate wanting a rightfull heire: you are withall at this time marriageable, my sute therefore is that héerein you will haue a more regard of the Prince Don Siluerio my brother a worthy knight of personage and valour, of an high birth, a kings sonne and heir, besides louing you so entirely as he can nothing more, long hath he endured this torment and neuer would bewray it to any but to me, and I haue hetherto suppressed it not to molest you now for compassion towardes him whome I must loue and honoure myne owne brother I require this that at least you shew him some good countenaunce whereby he may be encouraged to demaunde you of the kynge your father, which suite shall not be impossible if onely your lyking maye be wonne.The Princesse angry at the heart with this speach for it was the thing most contrary to hir wish replyed shortly. Madame Rodasylua, if I had thought that the zeale and loue which you haue professed and I doe confesse had tended to this issue, I shoulde lesse haue lyked your company, and I cannot thinke wel of it, that either you should breake with me of such matters or shoulde haue communication thereabouts with your brother, who as you say lacketh boldenesse to discouer his affection, which cannot be, doth he loue so earnestly, when he vouchsafeth not to speke vnto me but by a messenger. I suspect your words perhappes if I had hearde the man speake I miggt haue iudged in his countenaunce whether hee had lyed yea, or no.But for truth you knowe I am of young yeares at

this instant, neither haue I will to marraige, I pray you therefore name it no more vnto mée, and yet when I am of yeares I may not choose my husband, and I am at the kinges commaundement whom I must obey. The princesse Rodasylua so sharply rebuked by the Princesse Oliuia, and thereby gathering the little good wyll shee bare vnto hir brother, demaunded pardon of hir speache, and retourned to hir lodging whether she sent for the Prince Don Siluerio, and to him she tolde the whole talke with the Princesse aunswere, willing him notwithstandinge not to gyue ouer but to make a better shewe as if hir aunswere mislyked hym not, and couertly to laboure the king for his consent.This can hee not denye you, and after you maye winne the Princesse, for as yet hir excuse is but of yeares. The Prince liking hir counsayle departed from the Princesse his sister, and the next daye findinge the king at leysure he requyred his maiestie of a secret matter. The king commaunded those in presence to auoyd, & tooke him to a windowe, where the Prince after his duetie done, began on this sort. Wyth your graces fauour I tust, I haue this longe time bene a welwiller to your daughter the Princesse Oliuia and to haue hir to wyfe, whereto if it might please your highnesse to condiscend, I know my parents would wel agrée therto, for y^e great loue which they beare to your maiestie & to me their sonne, & thereby should I take my selfe to be the best rewarded for my long tarrying that euer prince was: I humbly beséech your highnesse to let me know your minde héerein. This demaund of the prince was nothing straunge to the king Oliuerio for he suspected this matter long before, & therfore his answere was short, that he was content to accept him for sonne in lawe, aswell for his owne worthinesse as for his birth, and for the friendship betwixt their people, yet sayth he, you shall giue me leaue to thinck thereon, & you shall haue a more resolute answere: the prince hoping y^t his

desire would take effect. Nowe the king to knowe the princesse minde therin went himselfe to the princesse lodging, where finding hir alone, hee counsailed hir in this sorte. It hath pleased God that the Prince Edwarde thy brother should be lost in the realme of Hungary, I hauing none other child but thee thinck it conuenient both for mine owne liking, and the common profit of my subiectes to haue thee marryed with some Prince of lyke estate. This haue I thought on a long time, and now vppon mature deliberation had wyth some speciall of my counsaile, I haue founde one: a prince which both for his power may, & for his courage will, & for his nobilitie is worthy to beare sway in so great an estate as this is, him am I content to take for sonne in lawe, and to commend my title vnto you. This Prince is Don Siluerio Prince of Lusitania, whom you knowe right well, a comly knight of personage, valiant in armes, of a couragious spirite aboue all vertuous, and in his dealinges circumspect, courteous of speach and of highe estate, as I know fewe like. Ther are besides to commend this match the entercourse of trafficke betwéene our subiectes, and the friendshippe betwéene his parents & mée. Héerein therefore say your owne fancy, for so farre as reason wyll, I am content to heare you: Thus sayd the kinge. But the Princesse whom these woordes more galled then swoord or speare, not knownig how to shift off the king hir father and not to aunswere his demaund, stoode in amaze for feare. The king séeing hir so silent, asked the cause why? she aunswered nothing yet a while. In the ende forced to say somewhat, she rather excused hir silence then reresolued the doubt. My Lorde and father sayth shée, I haue not aunswered you hetherto bicause I knowe not how to doe, neither may you now looke for a full answere. The matter is so straunge vnto mée, as that I neuer thought of it before, and your highnesse knoweth that I am of young yeares, & as yet I haue no desire to marry,

the time groweth on when I shall be of more age, and then perhaps shall I haue more desire, which whensoeuer it falles out shall be of your choise more then of mine owne. The kinge thinckinge that she had spoke as shéee ment, and that hir young age had bene hir onely staye, tooke in good part this excuse, willing hir notwithstanding to remember what he had sayd. So the kinge departed and the Princesse remayned somewhat better apayed by the kinges liking of hir aunswere, but hir hope was that Rosicleer would come, and that he beeinge present the kinges minde might be altered as touching Don Siluerio, and for this cause she made many a secret vowe for his spéedy retourne, but aboue all she looked for Fidelia. The king at his retourne caused Don Siluerio to be called, to whome hée declared his talke with his daughter, and hir aunswere, adding moreouer that heereafter hée thought the matter possible inough, for hir good likinge, beside his, whereoff he might be assured. Don Siluerio was the gladdest man aliue, and thancking the king, for so high fauour, for that time he departed from the king, but the Princesse grewe to be more melancholyke then before, for she espyed what courage he had taken by the comfort which the king had gyuen him. After Don Siluerio thincking the matter sure enough, departed the Realme with his sister Rodasilua, where let vs leaue him and tourne to the Emperour Trebatio.¶ The Emperour Trebatio carried away the princesse Briana from the monastery of the ryuer. Cap. 56.IN great pleasure and contentation dyd the Emperour Trebatio remayne with the Princesse Briana, at the monastery of the ryuer, where by their continuaunce together, their loues encreased so towardes each other, that either of them delighted in the other, and ey-

ther of them thought themselues happy when they wer in the others company. This loue betwéene them was in other manner then that which aryseth by a blaste of beautie: and it endured so longe betwéene them, that neither yeares, nor sickenesse, nor death scarcely could once empayre it, and for thys loues sake could the Emperour Trebatio willingly haue forborne both kiffe and kinred, and acquaintaunce in his owne countrey, and for hys loue durst the Princesse aduenture to flye hir Fathers Realme, and to abandon hir selfe to vnknowne passages, and to trauayle with Trebatio into Greece. As the Emperour Trebatio finding oportunitie tolde hir that he had counsayled with the knight of the Sunne as touchinge their departure, by whom he vnderstood y^t both for themselues and for the king Tiberio it was méetest to depart, otherwise saith he, may y^e king your father be blamed for the death of the Prince Edward, and our ioye might finde ende if I were discouered, but for the dispatche of thys whole matter, he sayd that he would leaue a letter in hir chamber wherein should be shewed both what and in what manner all thinges had bene done which you haue heard off. The Princesse yelded thereto gladly, and betwéene themselues they prouided thinges necessary for their departure, none being priuie thereto but Clandestria and the other gentlewomen. The day before the Princesse should depart, she tolde hir gentlewomen that shée had vowed ix. dayes fast in hir lodging, charging that for that time none should trouble hir, saue that she woulde haue Clandestria as she was wont, and this gentlewoman for necessary occasion. The Princesse was thus wont to doe very often which made it probable. The next day when all were ready and had voyded the princesse lodginge, the Emperour threwe in his letter and Clandestria shut the doore. So by the secrete posterne they all departed: This was a good while before daye, and they tooke such horse as had bene prouided by the

Princesse. By the opening of the morning they hadde ridden a prety way, and the Princesse being wery tourned out of the way to rest hir selfe in a shade, as euery thing made hir afrayde and wery, till that Clandestria hastened hir on, by saying that she thought their businesse would be suspected, in that she fetched not the broths as she was wont. So vp to the horse they goe, and héere breaketh of the first booke, what happened by the way the seconde booke declareth. Now lette vs remember by the way where we lefte our worthy Princes, what when we haue néede of them we may there finde them. The Emperour is in way to Greece: the knight of the Sunne abideth in Tiberios court: Don Siluerio is vppon the Sea towards Lusitania: Rosicleer now departeth from Thessaly after the establishing of the kingdome to the Quéene Arguirosa: Brandizel and Clauergudo stay in the kinge of Polonias courte, where the Prince Brandizel maketh loue to the Princesse Clarinea: Zoylo Prince of Tartary, Bargandel Prince of Bohemia, & Liriamandro prince of Hungary, all thrée together soiourne at the Emperours court at Trabisond, with the princesse Clarindiana a womā knight, of whom this whole story specially entreateth, but more at large héereafter. And thus endeth the first booke.FINIS.Chapters which are in this booke.CAPVT. 1. The description of the kinred and chusing of the Emperour Trebatio. Fol. 1.Cap. 2. The king of Hungary pretēding a title to the Empire setteth himself against the Emperour Trebatio. Fol. 3.Ca. 3. The emperour Trebatio by the hearsay of hir beuty was surprised with the loue of the Princesse Briana. Fol. 5.Cap. 4. Prince Edward entreth into Belgrado: the Emperour bethinketh himself of his remedy. Fo. 7Cap. 5. Prince Edward riding towards the monasterie of the riuer, was by the emperour Trebatio encountred and slayne. Fol. 8Cap. 6. The Emperour Trebatio was receiued at the monasterie by the Archbishop of Belgrado, and there betrothed by the name of Prince Edward. Fol. 9Cap. 7. The Emperour Trebatio driueth in his cōceit the order how to cōsummate the marraige, which in the ende he bringeth to passe accordingly. Fol. 11Cap. 8. The Emperour Trebatio pursuing those which had stolne his Lady, lefte all his knights and tooke an other way. Fol. 12Cap. 9. The aduentures of the Emperour in following the inchanted chariot. fol. 14Cap. 10. The Emperours knights finde not their Lord & the Hungarians misse the prince of England. fol. 18Cap. 11. The Princesse Briana taketh great sorrow at the losse of Prince Edward. fol. 19Cap. 12. The Princesse Briana was deliuered of two sonnes, Clandestria christeneth them & causeth thē to be noursed. fol. 20Cap. 13. The king of Boheme raysed the siege, and the king of Hungary returned the princes knights into England. Fol. 22Cap. 14. Clandestria deuiseth with the Princesse Briana how ehir sons might be brought vp in hri company. Fol 23.Cap. 15. Donzel del Febo was lost by misaduenture. Fol. 25.Cap. 16. The pedegree of the valiant Prince Florion & other matters as touching him. Fol. 29.Cap. 17. prince Florion in his way homewardes findeth by aduenture the young gentleman Clauergudo sonne to the king Oristeo king of Fraunce, & bringeth him with the gentleman of the Sunne to Babilon. Fol 31.Cap. 18. Prince Florion with the two young gētlemen entreth Babilō, & were ther honourably receiued by the Souldan. Fol. 35.Cap. 19. The deliuery of the Souldan by the gentleman of the Sun. Fol. 36.Cap. 20. An aduēture in the court of the Souldan, which befell to the young gentleman of the Sunne. Fol. 41Cap. 21. Donzel del Febo is dubbed knight & ouercommeth Raiartes. Fol. 46.Cap. 22 Africano king of Media & Persia, inferred war vpō the Souldan of Babilon. Fol. 50Cap. 23. The knight of the Sunne maketh aunswer to Africano as to his letter: Fol. 52Cap. 24. A cruel battaile between the knight of the Sunne and Africano: with the discomfiture of Africanos hoast. Fol. 56.Cap. 25. The knight of the Sunne, the two Princes Florion and Clauergudo, with a great hoast entred into Persia and there put Florion in possession of the crowne. Fol. 61Cap. 26. The knight of the Sunne and the Prince Clauergudo being in their way towards Babilon, wer deuided by a sodayne aduenture. Fol. 63.Cap. 27. The Princesse Briana discouered to Rosicleer secretly that he was hir sonne Fol. 66Cap. 28. Rosicleer departed from the monastery of the riuer without the knowledge of the Princes his mother. Fol. 68Ca. 29. Rosicleer in Liuerbas name slayeth Argyon and remoueth the lawes. Fol. 71Cap. 30. Rosicleer departed from the valley of the mountaines, meteth with two Princes christened, and by aduenture is carryed from them agayne. Fol. 74Cap. 31. Certeine accidents which befell Rosicleer after his departure from the two Princes. Fol. 79Cap. 32. The great feasts beganne in Oliuerios court. Fol. 82Cap. 33. An aduēture which chanced in king Oliuerios court. Fol. 90Cap. 34. A daungerous battayle betweene Candramarte and Rosicleer, Fol. 93.Cap. 35. A gentlewoman came to the court from the Princesse Briana which made him follow Brandagedeon. Fol. 97.Cap. 36. A cruell battaile between Rosicleer and Brandagedeon wyth his knights. Fol. 100.Cap. 37. Rosicleer & the two princes seek aduentures in the lande of Britayne, and the two gentlewomen carrye the Gyants body to Oliuerios court. Fol. 104Cap 38. The gentlewomē brought the bodye of Brandagedeon to the court, and the Princesses receyue the letters of their knights. Fol. 109Cap. 39. Arinda the gentlewomā belonging vnto the Princesse Briana, todle the bringing vp of Ro-

sicleer vnto the Princesse Oliuia. Fol. 113.Cap. 40. Fidelia being on hir way to carry the letter to Rosicleer was taken by sixe knights, & frō them deliuered by Rosicleer. Fol. 118Ca. 41. The Princes Bargandel & Liriamandro retourning from the forrest, misse Rosicleer. Fol. 125Ca. 42. Rosicleers departure is published in the court of king Oliuerio, Oliuia after knowledge whose sonne he was, reuerseth iudgement passed by a countermaund in an other letter, whereoff Fidelia lykewise is the bearer. Fol 127Ca. 43. Rosicleer was betrayed into the Ilande of Candramarte that Gyant whose handes had bene cut off before by Rosicleer. Fol. 131Cap. 44. The knight of the Sunne was carryed to the Ilande of Lindaraza, where he achieued many straunge and fearefull aduentures. Fol. 135.Cap. 45. The three Princes which wēt in the quest of Rosicleer, wer transported into the Empire of Trabisond where chaunced to thē a faire aduenture. Fol. 149Cap. 46. The two Princes Brandizel and Clauergudo stale secretly out of the kingedome of Persia to finde the knight of the Sun. Fol. 153Cap. 47. Rosicleer departeth from the Iland of Cādramarte & meteth with certeine aduentures on the Sea. Fol. 156Cap. 48. The battaile which Rosicleer had with Rolando. Fol. 161Cap. 49. The Emperour Trebatio & the knight of the Sunne are in their way to the kingdome of Hūgary. Fol. 163.Cap. 50. The emperour and the knight of the Sun riding towardes the monasterie of the riuer are by an aduenture seperated. Fol. 165.Cap. 51. The Emperour came to the monastery of the riuer and ther was made known to his wife the Princesse. Fol. 169Cap. 52. The Knight of the Sunne ridinge to the court of king Tiberio, iusteth with a knight of passage. fol. 179.Cap. 53. The knight of the Sunne aunswered before the king Tiberio for the Dutchesse Elisandra, & the battaile was appoynted betweene him and Arydon of the blacke woode. fol. 172Cap. 54. The battaile betweene the Knight of the Sunne and the strong Arydon. Fol. 173.Cap. 55. Don Siluerio demaunded the princesse Oliuia for wife of the kyng Oliuerio. fol. 174.Cap. 56. The emperour Trebatio carryed away the Princes Briana from the monasterie of the riuer. Fol. 178.FINIS TABVLAE.