Image of note from author to "Willie" included in this
inscribed copy of Graham's The Pit of
Corruption.THE PIT OF CORRUPTIONAdvertisement included at the front of  Graham's The Pit of
Corruption.THE PIT OF CORRUPTIONBY WINIFRED GRAHAM AUTHOR OF "THE LOVE STORY
OF A MORMON," "MAYFAIR," "A MIRACLE OF THE TURF,"
ETC. ETC.SECOND EDITIONLONDONSTANLEY PAUL & CO,31 ESSEX STREET, STRAND, W.C.Copyright for Graham's The Pit of Corruption.Table of contents for  Graham's The Pit of
Corruption.THE PIT OF CORRUPTION CHAPTER ISUZANNE was dreaming of dancing and music, as slowly dawn crept into the room touching the shadows with brightness, making phantom-like objects real and alive again. A pool of white water materialized into a looking glass, a shrouded form crouching by the open casement gradually changed to a pearl grey curtain, while a writhing serpent on the rose-coloured carpet became once more a thin silk stocking. A shower of silver stars hung midway in space from the painted ceiling, but they held no light of heaven in their electric globes.Outside the birds were busy with early morning movement and stir, their songs and dewdrop baths became the order of the hour. Only men, women and children missed the glory of earth's resurrection.Later Suzanne rubbed her eyes, tossed back her hair, and sat up with a yawn. Martha, the maid, was arranging a dainty breakfast by the bed-side, a golden breakfast of eggs and honey with milkless tea, in which a slice of lemon floated.Suzanne inherited much vivacity from a French father, who, for reasons of commerce, had deserted the lighter atmosphere of Paris. Her beauty came from the English heiress Monsieur de Malincourt married. The girl's elusive charm made a subtle appeal to the senses as well as the eye. Her laughing lips held a strange quiver like a ripple on the sea or the shiver of a sunbeam, while her eyes played odd little tricks wickedly fascinating, the lids and lashes seeming in league with the mischievous glances they veiled. Her nose was just a trifle sharp and pointed, as it wishing to be held above its fellows, in fact it had formed a secret alliance with its owner's imperious chin, both were self-willed, pleasure-loving, and faintly sensual. The child part of Suzanne dwelt in the baby texture of her soft skin, and the young formation of her figure. From France she gleaned her love of clothes, her passion for the outward adornment of surroundings, ugliness in any form gave Suzanne a sensation of inward nausea."Don't pull that blind quite so high, Martha," she said, "my eyes are still tired. Oh! how I danced last night, I wonder I have any feet left. Would you like to dance from ten at night till four in the morning, and then go on in your sleep, round and round to the same glorious tunes? Can you picture enjoying such a night?"Martha's lips were set, and their grim expression momentarily depressed Suzanne."My father was a Primitive Methodist, Miss, he thought that dancing was sinful. It may be quite right for ladies who can stay in bed late, but I was in service at sixteen, that makes all the difference.""Yes," murmured Suzanne, as she turned to her letters, for Martha was like a dark shadow in the room, and the girl felt glad when those heavy foosteps retreated down the corridor.Three of the letters were in masculine handwriting, and Suzanne read each one with varying criticism. The first raised a cruel little laugh which echoed round the room, as if to drive out any tender emotion which might cling to the now discarded letter."He's a fool," she said to herself. "I told him not to propose again. What on earth can he want with me? I should make him utterly miserable. He should marry a blue-stocking, but just because he is dull, learned and scientific he has a holiday mania for trying to catch butterflies. If I lived in his house I should be like one of those wretched moths who are popped into a poison bottle to die."She tore the notepaper viciously into small pieces, and buried them under the pink silk coverlet.The next letter evidently pleased."How well he understands women!" Suzanne murmured. "I suppose he has had heaps of flirtations, no fear of breaking his heart. Yes, I will give him six dances to-night, though he asks for twelve. It doesn't do to spoil men."Tucking the closely written sheet of paper into the soft folds of her wrap, she scanned the third letter with drawn brows."Really," she murmured, "I have refused often enough to go to the slums, just to please Canon Collinson. The smell of the people would make me sick, and I couldn't do them any good. Besides, I hate sordid things. I really shan't answer this time, it's the surest way of silencing people. His one object in life at present is to try and give me the blues. I'll ring for Martha to turn on my bath, the very thought of the slums makes me long to wash."She sprang up, tip-toed lightly into blue satin Turkish slippers, armed herself with a gigantic bottle of bath crystals from Paris, and ran to a white room where Martha was spreading warm towels. In a few moments a delicious perfume hung upon the air, and now the bathroom became like a sacred temple to Venus. Giant mirrors made wide reflections just as they had done in Monsieur de Malincourt's French home, and in them there moved a delicate pink form like a roseleaf in bud, but the sweet promise of still greater beauty, when the mid-day sun should unfold the secret of the rose's heart. An exquisite sense of laziness crept over Suzanne, as, relaxing her muscles she buried herself beneath the steaming hot water."I should like to lie here for ever," she told herself, as idly she traced the blue veins journeying through her limbs, and the rise and fall of fleeting breath. Then her thoughts ran on to other channels."I don't care what Martha says, I won't wear a petticoat at the dance to-night," she vowed. "Mother calls my eau-de-nil dress a 'Nymph gown,' it's so soft, it's like wearing nothing at all. I wonder how many men will say when they dance with me that I am as light as a feather. What a pity they all repeat the same thing! Perhaps I am getting blasée, one learns a great deal after being out for two seasons. I thought everything so nice until these stupid love affairs began. I can't take men seriously just yet. Fancy being married like mamma!"This idea was so terrible, even the soothing influence of the bath lost its charm, and stepping out, Suzanne shrugged herself into the folds of a voluminous towel, as if it could shield her from the dreaded state.Certainly Madame de Malincourt was very much married. She loved her husband dearly, giving up her life to dutiful service, and the spoiling of Suzanne. The whole fate of the nation might have hung on monsieur's whims and appetite, so strenuously did she seek to please her lord and master.Both parents adored the beautiful Suzanne, and from earliest childhood sought to keep from her any knowledge of sorrow or pain. If ill luck came their way, Suzanne was not told of it's advent. She had never been allowed to visit the poor, and if friends or relations were in trouble, it was Monsieur or Madame de Malincourt who provided the sympathy. From her cradle to her début in society, "Don't tell Suzanne," had ever been the motto when clouds hid the sun.Madame de Malincourt's sister, Brenda Williams, a woman of strong opinions, and the mother of two daughters, often hotly argued with her French brother-in-law on his leniency."I don't know," she had said, "whether this petting and cossetting of the young is customary abroad, but I think you are bringing your child up in a quite unnatural atmosphere. Surely it must make her heartless and unfeeling to be always shown the bright side of life, and never asked to share in the sufferings of others."Réné de Malincourt always listened with the air of one who hardly heard. Then waving his hand, dismissed the subject, blandly remarking:"Suzanne is a mere child, we cannot cloud a brow so fresh and smooth. It is necessary for old people to develop their sympathies, or they would not be tolerated. But the child is on the brink of life, so why not to enjoy?"Thus the habit of throwing dust in Suzanne's eyes became a family custom, and it was carried out even when sorrow stalked in. She was not allowed to know that Martha's mother was slowly dying of a long and tedious illness. Madame de Malincourt sent many gifts to the invalid, taking quite a deep interest in the daily reports of her sufferings, but Martha was charged never to mention sickness in Miss Suzanne's presence.That very day a worse account came by telegram, and Martha's hurried departure from the house brought a passing comment from the light-hearted Suzanne."I am glad you thought of giving that old wet blanket a holiday," she remarked to her mother, as Martha drove away, pale, bent and strangely aged. "Don't let her come back till she can be more cheerful. She should take lessons in smiling; she is a blot on the world with her melancholy face."A younger attendant dressed Suzanne for the evening's dance, deriving much amusement from the gaiety of her excited mistress. Certainly the girl looked wonderfully attractive in her draped garment of palest green, a wreath of leaves with diamond dewdrops crowned the curly head, the white neck and throat being innocent of jewels."I shall plaster my chest with heavy diamonds when it's withered and old," she said, examining in her glass the veins which were so specially admired in France. "They say that to wear green is ill-fated, how strange I have never chosen it before! Perhaps I shall be a wallflower, nous verrons!"No thought of failure, no fear of desertion really knocked at the door of that fast beating heart, as Suzanne, radiantly young and triumphant, entered the ballroom. In a moment her programme was besieged, and she was distributing her dances as a queen doles favours. Her aunt, who chaperoned her, was annoyed to see that her niece received far more attention than her own daughters."I am glad," she whispered to her youngest girl, "that you are not a flirt like Suzanne, men do not really like it, they amuse themselves with her, that is all.""I am afraid, mamma," replied Sybil, "that we are too well brought up to have a really good time. When you were running Suzanne down the other day, you know, Mr. Carlisle said she was delightfully spoilt. My card is only half full, and last night three of my partners cut me for her. I suppose virtue is its own reward, because no one troubles to reward it.""Hush, Sybil, what shocking things you say! When you talk like that I begin to wish I had never sent you to Girton."An elderly partner came to claim Sybil, and during the dance bitterly bewailed his fate because Suzanne refused to give him even an extra.I suppose," said Sybil, "men love beauté de diable, it's that funny twist of her lips which drives them all mad. Look how Mr. Carlisle is waltzing with her! Mother says it's disgraceful, just like an embrace. She made me promise not to dance with him, but she need not have troubled, he is avoiding everyone but Suzanne. I wonder if she had been sent to college whether some of the nonsense would have been knocked out of her!"Sybil's partner made no reply, he was thinking that Girton and Suzanne were as far removed as the poles, and that over-education might have nipped her freshness, moulding her into just an ordinary woman.As the evening wore on, Suzanne made for herself a host of enemies. Callously she cut her partners right and left, scandalising her aunt by a marked preference for Mr. Carlisle's attentions."He is certainly not the kind of man I should like either of my girls to marry," Mrs. Williams remarked of her niece's admirer. "I hear he is running through his money, and that it is wiser not to enquire into his past. I would remonstrate with Suzanne, only I know her parents have been foolish enough to encourage the young man, simply because his manner is attractive, and he comes of an old family. Social polish in their eyes far outweighs solid worth. There, she is off to the conservatory again with him. You never see my girls hiding away behind palms. They know I like them to remain under my eye, in order to avoid the faintest breath of scandal."She glanced towards the buffet, where her much-managed daughters were eating ices, and being bored by blasémarried men. Far away a little echo of laughter came from Suzanne's lips.Hugh Carlisle had begun to talk seriously for once, and his partner was doing her best to dissipate the mood."You cannot really be so terribly jealous as you pretend," she said, "it would make things horribly uncomfortable.""I am the only thing that is made uncomfortable," he replied. "I tell you I am jealous of everybody, men and women, where you are concerned. I can't bear them to speak to you or touch you. The other afternoon you laid your hand twice on Canon Collinson's arm when you were begging him not to take you to the slums. I can't tell you what it made me feel. Your Persian cat is the only living thing I can bear to see near you, he is so aloof, and disdainful of your attentions. Now you are going to dance with Lord Huntingtower, and you won't cut him, I suppose, simply because he is a lord."Suzanne's cheeks flushed."Then you think I am a snob, that's horrible! Titles mean nothing to me. They are utter, downright, unvarnished, or shall I say varnished, rot? But how am I to escape two-stepping with a heavy peer? He would track me down if I sat in the coal cellar."Hugh drew very near, and touched the undraped shoulder with compelling fingers. She could feel his breath upon her cheek, and some strong human power was at work upon her frailer nature. His eyes seemed to hold her irresistibly with a straight deep gaze which rivetted her own, a look so passionate that it puzzled and startled Suzanne. She was face to face with a new element in life, something vital, pulsing and hypnotic. She swayed even closer to him against her will, a sense of extraordinary weakness crept through her frame. She was just a little giddy still, though she had rested from the dance. She knew it was not the recent rhythmical movement which made her feel suddenly as if she were on a swing. She was in a mood to be docile and obedient, subdued by the first glimpse of passion's conquest, the desire to give. She hardly knew herself; she was some strange woman in a world of unrealities. No one mattered save the man at her side, the man whose jealousy had proved such a delicious compliment. She listened in wonder to the quick low words poured into her ear."I'll tell you what we'll do, Suzanne. We will make the night our own, and give your aunt the slip, until it is time for her to gather the brace of daughters she is chaperoning so admirably. My car is outside, let us creep away through a side door, and take a spin into the country. You shan't catch cold, I'll wrap you from your chin to your toes in a huge fur rug. No one need be any the wiser, and Lord Huntingtower can search every corner of the garden, he won't catch his prey. The stars are out, little Suzanne, and there is a moon, as pale as your face at the thought of agreeing to my daring scheme. You will come, I know you will come."The girl bent her head in voiceless assent, then she rose with her finger on her lips, stealing softly towards a door at the far end of the conservatory.A sigh of relief escaped the man as they passed out into the mild night air. He put his arm protectingly round the green draped figure, guiding her to an avenue where his car had been left unattended."It's only a two-seater," he said, "which I drive myself. I keep very late hours, no chauffeur would stand my ways. Sometimes when I am sleepless, I get up in the middle of the night and drive furiously, often it is the only way I can deaden thought.""Then your thoughts are not such pleasant companions as mine," declared Suzanne, glancing round cautiously before stepping into the car. "I love to lie awake thinking, I dance and amuse myself in imagination all over again. This is a lovely idea of yours, you generally have something novel to suggest."His breath came quick and fast, as, starting the motor, he sprang to the wheel. With one hand he guided the car, while the other imprisoned Suzanne's fingers in a grip that was almost pain. How weird the world looked under the influence of this midnight adventure! After the bright light and heat of the ballroom these cool stretches of moonlit country appeared miraculously enchanting, everything took a fairy tale form.The great dark trees made giant sentinels, the distant clouds vast ranges of mountain heights, hemming in some magic valley where moorland and field lay sleeping. On, on, went the travellers, talking in snatches, their blood hot with the fire of unspoken emotion. They passed through villages where the darkened windows of slumbering cottages proclaimed the lateness of the hour. At last, in a sheltered lane, where even the moonbeams stole with difficulty, Hugh stopped the car, and turned to Suzanne with an expression of strange elation in his face."Child," he said, "you wouldn't have done this if you hadn't loved me."Suzanne was trembling a little now, the rug slipped from her shoulders, and without a word of protest she let him gather her into her arms. His lips crept up her neck, till they pressed on her mouth the first kiss of hot devouring passion. Like a sleeper waking to life, Suzanne felt in every nerve a glorious throb of response. Only that morning she had scoffed in her heart at love, pitying her mother's willing slavery, telling herself she would hate to be tied to any man. Now the chains were winding round her, they held mystery and delight. She gave herself up entirely to the joy of surrender. For a moment it actually seemed to the man that he possessed her body and soul; she was his already, whatever the future held."I never knew," he said, and his voice broke slightly, "there was anything like this in the world. Other women, Suzanne, are merely shadows now. For every living creature there is one true mate, so seldom found. Men and women marry for varying reasons, but the genuine union of souls is pitifully exceptional. You have never believed in me until this moment; you often said I had not a heart to break—you thought I was merely a flirt. My God! picture it, you and I alone together, perhaps for months in some desert spot, on a long glorious honeymoon. That would mean really living, touching the rapture which half the world never finds."Suzanne listened, her face pressed against his."In my heart," she told him, "I have always wanted to be free, but to-night there is something that fights with my reason and changes everything. What is it, Hugh?""I can tell you in one word—Nature. She is the mistress of all the moods which matter, she pipes and we must dance, she dictates to the free, and binds them in her prison house of love. You cannot hush her voice or shut her out, Nature makes slaves of us all."Suzanne was not trying to understand, she was like a child enjoying an unknown experience. For the first time she was face to face with her own womanhood.The moments flew, as the man unfolded to her all his hopes for the future. Time, the thief, raced on, and Suzanne forgot that many would miss her from the ball. Indignant partners were already bombarding her aunt with enquiries, while even Sybil and her sister met to discuss the prolonged absence of their outrageous cousin."She is nowhere in the conservatory," said Mabel, the eldest girl. "I pretended I had lost my handkerchief and hunted in every nook and corner, though you know I have not sat out there once.""Mother actually let me go into the garden with quite a nice man," Sybil confided, "hoping I might find Suzanne, and beg her to come in. It is nearly time to go. Fancy if she has eloped! What would poor uncle and aunt say?"The last dance had been played, and an extra was in progress, when a distracted chaperon appealed to her hostess."I don't know what to do," she said. "I have quite lost sight of my niece. It is too bad of a girl to place one in such an awkward position. Our carriage has been waiting over an hour, yet I cannot well leave without Suzanne, since I am responsible for her to her parents."In consequence of Aunt Brenda's agitation, search parties were sent through the house and grounds to try and retrieve the missing Suzanne. Everyone was saying good-night, and Mrs. Williams had grown absolutely purple with fury. She was standing in the hall by her daughters, cloaked and hooded, the girls looking almost as shocked as their mother. Their host had assured them Miss de Malincourt was neither in the house nor grounds. Every possible sitting-out place had been investigated, and the disappearance became a complete mystery."I am sure we ought to be going back," said Suzanne, disentangling herself from her lover's embrace. "I dread to think what my hair will be like when I sail into the ball-room after this frantic drive. Won't my cousins look at me askance, but I don't care, this has been the most wonderful night of my whole life? Do look at your watch, Hugh, and break the time to me gently. I have a horrible idea it is much later than we think,"A ray of moonlight made it possible to see the hour, and as Hugh glanced down at the warning hands, he started visibly."By Jove!" he muttered, "is it possible?"Suzanne noticed that he slipped the watch back into his pocket before she had read its guilty secret, then instantly started the engine without replying to the girl's anxious enquiry."It is a little later than I thought," he owned. "Never mind, we'll race back at top speed, you have no idea the pace I can get out of this car. You don't mind driving fast, you are not nervous?"Suzanne laughed gaily as she drew the fur rug over her shoulders, though from head to foot she tingled with a burning warmth."I have a perfect craze for speed," she owned. "You can go as fast as you like, for the roads are clear, and I want to waltz with you again before I am hurried home by my reproachful aunt. She is certain to suspect something, for she watches each dance, and makes a mental note of my partners. I am afraid my green dress is rather conspicuous. I cannot lose myself in the crowd."Suzanne knew that Hugh Carlisle was driving at a reckless pace, yet he still kept only one hand on the wheel, the other was holding a girl's slim fingers. Suddenly the road curved, and the moon, hiding behind a cloud, obscured a post warning motorists that the corner was dangerous. At that instant, round the bend, another car came swiftly—full upon them. Hugh swerved aside, his fast running wheels racing up a bank.There was a horrible crash, then silence, save for the throbbing of a tortured engine, and the cries of fear from the occupants of the other car. It held two ladies and a man in evening dress, recent dancers at the very ball from which Suzanne had been missed. The chauffeur and his master hurried in trepidation towards the overturned car. The women dared not follow, but sat weeping hysterically in the dark shadow of a landaulet.Presently their companion returned, his face was very grave, and his voice trembled."There are two people," he said, "the man is still alive, but the woman is dead. I recognised her directly, in spite of her injuries. She is that beautiful girl we noticed at the dance. I asked her name, it is Suzanne de Malincourt."CHAPTER IISUZANNE was merely conscious of a great crash, and then a momentary stillness. Almost immediately a glorious sense of freedom stole over her, the moonlight became brighter, the air purified, everything appeared preter-naturally distinct. One second of time had changed her from the imprisonment of the flesh, to a disembodied spirit freed from the fetters of mortal life. She could see her own form lying motionless and pale in death, the crushed green gown stained with blood, the face livid and marred. She felt no sense of horror at the sight, only a deep absorbing interest.Someone touched her on the shoulder, it was not a human hand, but more like the breath of the wind when it weighs down a frail twig, bending it to earth. She turned, and beside her stood a tall misty figure, unlike any she had seen before. His eyes were bright as stars, and his voice was very low, musical and compelling."Suzanne," he said, "do you know me?"She shook her head, trying to see him more clearly, for now she was gradually becoming invisible to herself."The people I know," she replied, "are like the men and women standing in the road, looking with such horror on Hugh Carlisle, and the little body at his side. Why! that's my body. I used to love it when it could move and respond, now it seems no good at all, yet they are treating it so kindly. Look! they are carrying me away as if I were something precious. I suppose it is difficult for them to understand that I am really so near, and the rest means nothing."She caught the sound of a fluttering sigh which seemed to travel from voice to voice, as if the air were full of influences."There are other people here," she said quickly, "but they are so different to you. Don't leave me, for I feel you are my friend."Again her companion spoke, and now his tone was strangely mysterious."My child," he replied, "you can just faintly hear the sighing of those other earth-bound souls who are not yet fit to rise. Each has an angel guide, and will in time be led up to the heights you cannot yet see. This was your parents' doing, they never let you know the meaning of sorrow, and so it has been decreed that before you touch the borderland of rest, you must hover near earth and know the sorrows of the world. I have been your guardian angel since you were born, but even in childhood you could not see me, though little children are often given the vision of their angels. You had too many pleasures, too much comfort, too many toys. The earth swallowed you up and surrounded you with her gifts. You never stretched your hands to the stars, you were never even purified by the tears which are shed for others. Later in life I tried to speak to you, sometimes I stood by and wept when you knelt to say your prayers. Can you remember your thoughts, when night after night you repeated the words which should have brought you in touch with higher powers?"Suzanne gave a little cry, like the wail of a soul first wakened with the sharp edge of conviction."My mind always wandered when I knelt to pray. I remembered the little things I had forgotten, a letter, perhaps, unanswered, some alteration to a dress which was not pretty enough to please me. I would even make plans, unconsciously, I suppose, plans for enjoying the days which always held pleasure, because I was young and able to enjoy. I thought if I just said the words, it would count for something, I could never keep my thoughts fixed for long. Perhaps if I had known you were near, I shouldn't have been so blind.""Angels," he replied, "can only speak when the heart is open, and the road lies clear. You never needed me, and we simply come when we are wanted. Your mechanical words could not mount up because they were unworthy, in fact they were not prayers at all. We cannot bear gifts to the King unless the giver wishes to give. Listen! listen! Can you hear music in the distance? Does the song overhead reach you?"Suzanne bent forward, trying to catch those heavenly strains, which were evidently clearly heard by the man at her side."All is silent," she told him. "What song can you hear?"He looked at her with eyes that glowed mournfully. For the first time his features became quite visible, illuminated by weird spiritual light."The unheard music," he whispered, "is the saddest in the world. You are not in tune to understand it's harmony, nothing but earth music can reach your soul. Some day it may be different, when you and I have taken a pilgrimage together through the world, touching all the notes of sorrow which will possibly burst into a song of gladness. When you realise the true meaning of life, you may be fit to feel the borderland of the higher world. All the earth-bound spirits are learning the lessons they missed in life, I am your school-master, presently I will show you the first sorrow. Dawn is breaking, look where that faint shaft of light pierces the sky. Do you see any forms moving above the summit of those hills?"Suzanne looked at the distant sky, fathomless as the sea, but she only observed the new-born day creeping forth from the womb of the night."There are no figures," she answered a little impetuously. "This must be all a dream, and I shall probably wake to find Martha at my side. It is certainly the strangest dream I ever had, but it cannot mean death, for there is nothing so very terrible in finding oneself like a vapour, drifting at the will of the wind.""Your life was the dream," he told her, "this is reality. Those unseen faces are like the unheard music, you are earth-bound, or you would have discerned them. Some day they will become clear, faces of welcome, faces of peace, the faces which were once pale, tear-stained, weary, and aged. Remember how you despised Martha, your maid, you did not trouble to look into her heart, yet she might have given you the gift you lacked all your life. You lived and died without sympathy for others, all worldly pleasures were real, sorrows did not exist."Suzanne knew that he spoke truly, and found herself listening with extraordinary interest. Then she smiled up at her spirit guide."I had no idea angels could be so interesting," she said. "Isn't it sad that people on earth are never conscious of their presence? If only the angel guides were visible.""Sometimes the prison house is broken into," he replied. "If you had lived longer, and known what it meant to lie beneath the scalding hand of pain, my chance might have come. Look, the world is waking, the people who have not yet passed over the borderland are beginning their mundane tasks. They think it so splendid to live to a great age, because they are afraid to come to us, and all men are cowards where death is concerned. For many immediate rest is waiting, but they prefer to toil on, since ignorance is their burden."Suzanne was now drifting hand in hand with her guide over a number of houses from which faint wreaths of smoke rose in feathery pillars, like incense on the morning's glowing altar.The man took her to a small room in a cottage where an old querulous woman lay on a bed of pain. Beside her stood two daughters, whose youth and gaiety of spirit had long since been worn out by ceaseless attention and unswerving fidelity to the sufferer's claims."There lies a soul," he said, "for whom life holds nothing, yet it remains her dearest possession. She fights to retain it as men fight for gold. She has ruined both her daughters' lives, they have given up the love of man to serve their mother, who only rewards them with perpetual grumbling. They are the slaves of duty, yet their lot is a common one. The angels weep when they see those unsmiling faces, because gradually the light of trust has died out of their eyes with the light of youth. Once they believed in the coming of love and looked forward to the joys of motherhood, but their task-mistress kept them fast bound in a home which had never been home really. Selfishness is one of the sorrows which never touched your life. Some day these unrecognised martyrs, who daily tread a path of thorns, will be released, instantly seeing those faces which were hidden from you in the dawn, and they will hear the music to which your ears were deaf.""But what of the woman on the bed? Will she be earth-bound for a season because she has spoilt her daughters' lives?""That is not for me to tell," he answered softly. "Pain may, perhaps, outbalance her thoughtlessness, and through his torturing hands she might be guided to the gates you cannot pass."Suzanne was standing at the foot of the humble bed. She could hardly believe the fretful woman, propped up by pillows, was totally unaware of the spirit forms in the room.One of the daughters had slipped away, making a sign to her sister, but her absence was immediately noticed by the invalid."Where is Isobel?" asked the complaining voice. "Really she is most inconsiderate, and always goes away just when I want her.""Isobel," replied her sister, "has been up all night, it is her turn to rest a little now. You must try and put up with me, dear."Patiently she stroked the thin wrist, looking with eyes of anxiety to see if her words had caused offence.The invalid said nothing, but her lips were set, and her brow grew frowning, nothing the younger sister did could ever be right in her eyes. Isobel was a born nurse, but unfortunately human nature made demands upon her which were strongly resented by the mother."They are both so tired," whispered Suzanne. "Can I stay and watch a little while they rest?"A faint smile of triumph parted the angel's lips. Already he had opened one small chink of her soul through which the light pierced. She felt the first stirring of sympathy."Try," he whispered, "try what you can do."Suzanne moved towards the tired daughter, it seemed she passed right through her till she reached the sufferer's side."What is the matter with you, Jane?" asked the old woman. "Have you been seized with a chill? Why do you shiver like that? I felt it, too, there is some strange draught in the room. You have forgotten to bolt the windows, or, perhaps, Isobel has left the door open."Jane rose and steadied herself against a chair, suddenly overwhelmed by a sense of faintness."There is no draught," she murmured, "but I feel rather ill. If I leave you for a few moments, mother, will you promise not to call Isobel?"The woman on the bed nodded assent, greatly to her daughter's surprise. Then Jane walked slowly to the door, and the much-watched invalid found herself alone. For a moment resentment filled her heart. It was just like Jane to go away when Isobel had left her at the post of duty. Really a mother was hardly treated, when she could not have at least one daughter to watch by her in sickness. Jane's pretended faintness was obviously an excuse to pass the time in some more pleasant pursuit.Tears of indignation and self-pity welled into the woman's eyes as she inwardly repeated her grievances. How would they like to endure her sense of weakness, to be bedridden for years, till the room and faces around became hateful with monotony? With difficulty she raised herself on her elbow to ring a bell which would certainly waken the eldest daughter from her much-needed slumbers. Just as she bent forward, a compelling influence stayed her hand. She could almost believe an unseen form stood between her and the little table, where the bell was surrounded with various medicine bottles, and other things collected for the patient's use. Miraculously a soothing sense as of someone near crept over the angry frame, and the whole train of her thoughts altered as though dominated by another's will. She fancied a voice whispered in her ear of freedom close at hand, of patience, which might win her a sigh of regret when she left those hard-worked daughters. As in a dream she remembered the early days of her youth, when life was full of love and freshness. Gradually there came a vision of the little church in which she was married, where later on she stood at the font, and a clergyman, who had long since died, named her first-born Isobel. Jane, of course, was a disappointment, for Jane was to have been a son, only an evil fate which dogged the young wife's footsteps forced her to resign many of her dearest wishes. Strangely enough she began to wonder whether she had made the best of things when health was in her body, and the house rang with childish laughter. Conscience, long silent, stirred uncomfortably, convicting her of failings she had never owned to herself until this moment. Her thoughts were passing into a new channel, leaving the old groove, drawing her out of herself. Now she lay back on her pillows with eyes wide open, staring up at the ceiling like one who expects to see the materialization of a fancy. It was the effect of Suzanne's early effort for others in her new career. She was working to try and alleviate the sorrows of those harrassed daughters who never gained a word of gratitude, and to impress upon the aged mind that death was not so terrible as it appeared.Presently the invalid felt so strangely soothed and rested that she sank into a long peaceful sleep. While she slept Suzanne smoothed away the frown which knit her brow, touching the lips till their bitter expression changed to something of rapture. Soon Jane reappeared and walked on tip-toe to the bed."How wonderful!" she murmured. "Mother is actually smiling, she looks so happy she must have lost her pain. If she always wore that expression it would be worth while waiting on her till we dropped with fatigue, it is her endless complaining which wears one out."Suzanne and her guide drifted silently away, only as they passed the window, it seemed to Jane that a ray of sunshine shot through the room with arrow-like swiftness, dazzling her for the moment as a flash of lightning."Will my influence last?" asked Suzanne. "When the mother wakes, won't she be just as cross and ill-natured again?""No good thought is ever lost," replied the man. "It must glow as a beacon of hope through her days, for she knows she has been visited by a spirit."Suzanne looked back at the cottage."I am glad that we found her," she said, "but I have been forgetting Hugh Carlisle. Won't you take me to him? He loved me, and though our love brought death to me, he was still breathing when they carried him away.""There are others who need you more," said the man. "I will guide you to your home where your father and mother mourn the child they treated so cruelly.""They were always kind," cried Suzanne. "How can you call them cruel?""They were not worthy to bring up a soul," he answered, with some hardness. "It is better you should be parted from them now for a season than separated eternally, which might have been your fate. You were made to bring sorrow to those you loved. You would never have given a proper return, it was not in your light heart to do so.""Then you were not near me on the night Hugh told me of his love," Suzanne declared, as her mind clung to an earthly kiss and all the tingling joy it brought."You thought you loved," whispered her guide, "and you were spared the disillusionment which would have followed. Passion's thrill is not true love. He cared, but you only loved Love. He was the better of the two. He knew the evil he had done in life and when he took you in his arms he repented of all his sins. A compassionate Providence saved him from building his house on sand and giving all that was best in his manhood to a shadow. The day is full upon the earth now—come to the house where the blinds are drawn, spend one last hour in your earthly home,"CHAPTER IIITHE grief-stricken parents were alone in a darkened chamber. Suzanne's mother was like a woman frozen to stone, for hours she had hardly spoken, and certainly she could not cry. All the blood in her veins seemed to have congealed, and channels of grief were dry. The comely beauty of the matron had changed in a single night to a wrinkled and hollow-eyed age, prematurely stamped upon a face which could not wear again any resemblance of it's lost youth.Réné, the father, had never appeared so un-English as in these hours of woe. The floodgates of his tears were not barred by any masculine restraint. Like a madman he rushed about the house, wringing his hands, and groaning aloud. The servants fled before him in terror, and Canon Collinson, who called to condole, was so petrified by the violence of his wrath against Heaven, that the usual phrases of professional sympathy failed. In shocked surprise he begged Monsieur de Malincourt to, at least, control his language, saying that curses in the house of death would bring an additional vengeance from above.Now, alone in his wife's room, Réné continued his tirade against the powers that be. They had robbed him of his all in life, leaving him without love in the world. He forgot that the woman who bore Suzanne should count for something in this day of darkness.Philippa de Malincourt gazed at him with her large mournful eyes, wondering whether his brain or her own would snap first. Perhaps the noise he made was a relief, and to grieve hysterically brought at least the solace of fatigue."Canon Collinson spoke so very kindly to me," she said. "Thank you for consenting to see him, he was most anxious to do what he could for us both. He admired our child so much, that he told me lie felt her loss as if she were his own."Réné frowned and stamped his foot, for his wife's words cut him to the quick."Like his own! Mon Dieu! but these men are hypocrites. Like his own, and he is walking about the streets talking to his neighbours. His face is a little longer than usual, but he has taken his meals, and he will sleep to-night. Like his own, you say, how dare he, how dare he? Let him wait till his heart is torn to shreds, and cut into a thousand bleeding fragments. He can talk when he has been down to Hell, when he has eaten the dust of death in life. Why, he would not even see her where she lay, he did not wish to be unnecessarily harrowed. I suppose he will take the service, and read those last prayers without a break in his voice. Could lie do that if she were his own?"Philippa shuddered back in her chair, sorry she had spoken. Since early morning, silence had been her greatest refuge. She could understand herself, numb, stricken, bowed to the earth with her weight of grief, but, for once, she could not comprehend her husband. The wild flash in his eyes had some kinship with madness, though she knew the Gallic blood in him counted for much.After a long pause she ventured another remark, since the sight of Réné staring into nothingness, racked her nerves even more than his frenzied talk."I do not believe Hugh Carlisle will recover, he is not yet conscious, and his injuries are very severe. He has a mother, too, we know, at least, what she must be suffering."Monsieur de Malincourt placed both his fists on his forehead, pressing his temples against them, till he fancied his head must burst."God grant," he muttered fiercely, "that the devil may die, to save me becoming a murderer. As I live, Philippa, that man shall pay the price of his hideous sin. If I do not actually take his blood, I will not rest until I have ruined him utterly. There are more ways than one of destroying an enemy, when all else fails, vengeance is left. I have sworn it over my darling's body, I have whispered it into her ear, calling Heaven as my witness. Carlisle may be taken at once to his deserved damnation, or he may be left to face me, and the consequence of his crime.""Réné, Réné," cried Philippa. "You do not know what you are saying. Grief must have turned your brain, that you, the kindest of men should speak of ruin and murder is terrible. It was an accident, you might as well threaten to destroy the men in the other car, they were also responsible for this terrible calamity.""But why did the accident occur?" thundered Monsieur de Malincourt. "Because this villain had lured our pure young daughter away with a black scheme in his heart to sully her innocence. He smuggled her out of a friend's house and we shall never know with what lie he urged her to fly with him in the night at the risk of her reputation. Child that she was, she did not realise she was placing herself at the mercy of a libertine. It is not his fault that she died pure, what would he have given us back after the elopement? I heard from time to time some strange reports about him, but I was always slow to believe scandal, I let him come here as our friend. I thought to myself, if he admires Suzanne he will tell me, and ask for her hand in marriage as an honourable gentleman, instead he took our child for a wanton. Sometimes I used to wonder if you ought to rob her of that veil of innocence which makes life's path so dangerous to these child-women. Her home was sheltered enough, but the wolf prefers a safe harbour, he finds the better meat there, to satiate his appetite."While Monsieur de Malincourt spoke, Philippa tried hard not to believe that the wild escapade was really sinful.Ignoring his angry utterances, she turned to a sheaf of sympathetic telegrams which so far, she had barely read."Brenda is coming back here later in the day," she said. "Perhaps you would rather not see her, though I daresay she will be calmer than she was last night.""Certainly I shall not see her," replied Réné in a broken voice. "She is your sister, so I cannot forbid her the house, but I shall never forget the cruel things she said of our child before she knew Suzanne was dead. What right had any woman to burst into our house, and tell us that through weakness we had brought this disgrace upon ourselves, and that Suzanne would be the talk of the neighbourhood? Brenda saw evil in all those gentle arts and graces which were part of our darling's self. She even dared to compare Suzanne adversely with her own daughters.""You are judging very harshly," said Philippa, "for poor Brenda broke down entirely when she heard the news, and fainted for nearly an hour."Monsieur de Malincourt rose and bent over his wife."You did not faint, what does your calmness mean?" he asked. "It isn't natural. I thought you would mingle your tears with mine, instead, you are like marble.""I can't help it," she whispered, "we must both grieve in our own way, dear. There is no set rule for a broken heart to follow. Réné, I feel I must look at her again, I must go to Suzanne."She tried to wave her husband back, but he followed, and together they entered the chamber of death. A heavy scent of lilies filled the air, and all intimate associations with the one who had so recently occupied that room, seemed crowded out by the white blossoms. It was more like a mausoleum now, yet only the previous night Suzanne had dressed there for the ball, laughing and talking with the maid who was such an improvement on Martha.Madame de Malincourt drew back the sheet which revealed a face so strangely child-like in it's setting of snowy blossoms. A cloud of golden hair hid a gash on the dead girl's forehead, she might have been asleep but for the pallor on her lips. So sudden had been her death that faint colour still tinged the icy cheeks.A shaft of light fell across the blind. Just at that moment Suzanne and her guide entered the room."How different this place looks!" she said, "they have moved the things I liked best. Oh! and there is that body again which I thought I had done with. Father and mother are hanging over it, as though it counted for something.""It is all they have left," replied her companion, "and soon even the mask must crumble to dust. Memory will remain, but time dims the power of recollection. After some years the sound of your voice will cease to ring in their ears, and none will listen for your footsteps. Look into their hearts and tell me what you see."Suzanne drew close to her mother, stretching out fluttering hands as if to pull her away from the motionless form on the bed."There is nothing to see but a blank," she told the angel. "Everything seems to have stopped except just that mechanical beating which keeps her alive. She was always so warm and loving, now she does not even care for papa. Perhaps it is because lie is frowning so. I don't like his heart at all, it has such a black shadow right over it, something I never guessed was there, something horrible.""It is the dark thunder cloud of murder," said the voice at Suzanne's side. "When vengeance cloaks the heart it is always like that, no one can look at it without a shudder. Presently the black will turn to crimson, and pity cannot penetrate that veil. His restless soul rages like the sea breaking upon rocks, compassion is blinded by fury, there is no mercy or justice in his being. He suffers less than the woman at his side, lie waits to repay, and the fires of hell burn out his misery. He can even speak of his contemplated crime, and glory in the thought."Suzanne drew away, she felt so strangely separated from the father she had hoped to comfort by her near presence."He has built a barrier between us," she said; "he will not even let me get to mother.""Sin," replied the angel, "always shuts men and women away from the influence of the dead. Your parents are crying out for you, but because there is no resignation in their hearts they cannot touch the chords of communion. I thought I might bring you so near to them that they would feel your kiss, and some strange peace creep through their veins to staunch the wound. Instead, they are out in the wilderness alone, some day they may find you, but not yet. A deep void yawns between them and those who have thrown off the world and it's shackles.. . . Neither of those sufferers can know comfort in their present hardened condition. Before the end, those strong waves of resentment may die down, and anger at fate will cease to rage. Where thorns grow now, flowers shall spring up, not the death-white flowers on a grave, but spring blossoms of hope.""How soon will that be?" asked Suzanne."When the cliff between the lowland and the highland crumbles to earth and makes them one. When your father no longer curses God and man, when your mother's frost-bitten soul is thawed by the sun of Heaven. Some day in visions she might see you smiling and triumphant, now she can only behold a figure in a shroud. Blessed are those who look beyond, they never speak of their dead as 'poor.' Come, we will go, these people have no use for us, the doom of death has fallen upon them, as surely as on the child they mourn."Suzanne drew away, relieved to be gone. As they left the house she could hear the church bell tolling."That cannot be for me," she murmured, "for it is saying "rest! rest!'""A human hand is ringing the bell," answered her guide, "for everyone it tolls the same. Sometimes we hear how it mocks and derides. Often it is muffled for very shame, occasionally it has a glad sweet note.""You seem to know everything," said Suzanne. "Were you ever upon earth?""I am not here to talk about myself," replied the voice. "Know me simply as your guardian angel, who in the spirit world is called Velvein.""I have heard that name before," cried Suzanne with a sudden flash of recollection."Yes," he replied, "it was whispered in your ear at birth, but as you grew, you lost the recollection. Sometimes I almost left you, as year after year you drove me away. I might have guarded you more closely, you could have stood in my shadow, and walked with my hand in yours daily. Even now, we are still strangers.""But I like you, and I want you for a friend," Suzanne protested. "Velvein, why did mother never tell me that I had a guardian angel?""Perhaps you failed to listen," he replied, "or more likely she did not know. Her angel is far away, she cast him out when all her thoughts were given to the spoiling of an earth-child. Your home was so material it could not keep many messengers within it's walls.""My life seems to have been rather a mistake," said Suzanne. "I am so glad I left it before I lost you altogether."They were floating over a cemetery in which two men were digging a grave."That is called by men the 'Hallowed Acre,'" said Velvein, and there was a note of derision in his tone. "It is merely a box-room for old cast-off lumber, and it is only because you are earth-bound that you can see chat they are doing there.""I can't see very clearly," said Suzanne.Velvein smiled."That is well," he replied, turning his eyes to the hills with an expression of rapture.Suzanne felt sure he was looking at the faces which were hidden from her sight, and listening to the music she might some day hear.CHAPTER IVSUZANNE and Velvein were drifting over a vast city, upon which evening fell. The crowded world, the glitter of the earth lights, all seemed strange to her now. These things which were once realities, became as phantoms. She and her guide were the real beings, looking on at a strange and sordid play."I am going to show you the sorrows of shame," he said. "Gaze down on the thronged thoroughfares, and note how many of these wanderers have lost their guardian angel."Suzanne saw in the garish light a number of women whose steps were slow and measured. Evidently they had no particular call to hurry, no definite work in hand which must be fulfilled. They made her think of lost animals wandering in the wilds seeking a fold, and with a thrill of shrinking pity she drew even nearer to the spirit at her side."There are so many dark shadows round them," she murmured, "keeping pace with their steps. They look to me like devils. Why do they whisper such horrible things in the women's ears, and make them loathe the task of living? There is no ray of spirit light near them at all, yet they smile and nod and talk merrily enough, as if indeed they had found happiness and were able to enjoy themselves. Would it not be better if they were with us, even earth-bound, for they really hate their existence?""I do not want you to understand," said Velvein as he showed her the inward festering of many a guilty conscience. "I only tell you their sorrow is greater than that pain of bereavement you witnessed in your late home. When all spirituality has been crushed out of human nature, the stifled soul dies in life, and the body is full of rottenness and decay. Many of these weary ruined creatures were happy as children, but the devils proved too much for them. Now they will remain in absolute slavery till they escape from the bondage of the flesh. Whom shall we follow in all this motley crew? I give you your choice. We are free to go where we will."Still with a strange sense of dread, Suzanne regarded those wandering forms, seeing only their inward misery, uninfluenced by the outward trappings which deceived human eyes."Look!" she said, "there is a girl hurrying to a play-house. She does not loiter by the way. Round her feet little twinkling rays of light are trying to keep her steps straight. Sometimes she misses them, sometimes she walks in a line with the angel who moves before her. I should like to follow her, because the very dark ones frighten me so."Julia Dale was young and very poor. Her brief career on the stage brought her little money and no fame. She was well aware that failure hung over the management which might possibly refuse to pay, and dismiss it's company that very evening. Sick at heart she reached the stage door, only to be told the crash had come. There was no money to meet expenses, and her recent work must remain as one of the many debts on the embarrassed producer of an ill-fated piece.As she turned away she tried to blink back the scalding tears, which threw everything into a haze. The light about her feet which Suzanne had seen so clearly, grew dim as she paused to consider the future. She dared not go back to her lodgings without money; already the landlady's patience was exhausted. In a flash Julia remembered that Frederick Reece had told her if ever she wanted a helping hand, she had only to come to him. Well she knew the character he bore. Other girls, whose reputations were lost, had hinted to her that this man always kept his word. He was rich and generous, but the price lie exacted would not bear thought."No," she said to herself. "I will beg in the streets before I ask him for a penny."The vow had hardly been made, when a hand was laid upon her shoulder. Turning round she saw a tall, handsome figure welcoming her with a smile."How strange!" she gasped. "I was just thinking of you, Mr. Reece. What are you doing here?""I heard the management was in a bad way," he replied, "and I thought my poor little friend might possibly be turned off with a quarter of her salary. You are surely not going home in this state of depression. Why! I do believe you have been crying. Such pretty eyes were not made for tears; cheer up, my child, you are young and the whole world is before you. To-night I have been feeling lonely and dissatisfied, I want a companion whose powers of enjoyment have not been exhausted like my own. Will you come and dine with me? We are close to the Savoy; I hate to eat alone."Julia hesitated. The temptation was strong, for she certainly did not know where to get her next meal. A public restaurant was surely a safe place, and this man of wealth made his request almost as if it were a favour. There was something strangely pleasant in feeling she could be of use to anybody on such a night of calamity to herself."Yes," she replied, "I will come, but I fear I shall disgrace you in my little walking dress. You are always amongst fashionable people. What would your friends say if they saw you with me?"He laughed at her remark as if it were utterly absurd."The gorgeously dressed women who pay fabulous prices for their gowns would give anything to have your fresh complexion, and the natural blue of those eyes which must never cry again. As a matter of fact we could not go into the fashionable dining-room dressed as we are, but the grill room is a refuge for the hatted, where none need feel conspicuous. At heart, I am a Bohemian, the shows and shams of life do not appeal to me at all."Julia found herself hurried into a taxi, and a few moments later she was rubbing shoulders with luxury and affluence. She felt strange and out of place as she left her coat in the mirrored room, where the attendant looked far grander than herself. As she emerged into the hall, she might have been a duchess, so deferential was Frederick Reece's manner. For a moment it canned her fears, and made her almost trust him.As they seated themselves at a little table for two, Julia felt strangely attracted by the outward comforts of good living. The dainty dishes, the iced champagne, and the gaiety of his conversation, helped her to forget her true position. She was quite unconscious that even there, in the midst of pulsing life and movement, influence from the spiritual world hovered near, grieving that the light about her steps had almost vanished."Can't we get her away?" asked Suzanne, watching from her sphere on a higher plane. "We can see quite a different man. She has no idea that his soul is so black and shrivelled; every vestige of the divine has gone. She is admiring the shape of his white hands, but really they are stained and withered. What has he done to look so hideous underneath? He seems outwardly kind, yet all the time he is wishing her ill."Velvein covered Suzanne's eyes with his wings, as if to blot out the sight."He is like many others," replied the voice, "there is nothing really strange in what you see. He has neglected his opportunities, he has crushed his better self, and nature must always have her revenge upon neglect. He is like one of those burrowing animals who spend their lives under the ground. He cannot come out into the light, because the darkness has blinded his eyes. He would be like a mole, and the sun would mean nothing to him. This girl is only to be one of his many victims, that is his way of killing time. He is very careful not to lose the respect of his own world, all his dark deeds are done under another name. It is his pastime to ruin souls."Julia felt deep down in her conscience that the step she had taken was a foolish one. Why should a man of fashion trouble about her when she was so poor and submerged? She could not believe his motive was good, her life at the theatre had taught her that such men do not lavish their favours in the cause of charity. She was weak from the little food she had taken during the past few days, and the wine seemed to mount to her head making her reckless, urging her on to desperate deeds.While he talked in his low well-modulated tones, she listened, fascinated by the wit of a man of the world. He asked her if she ever longed to see the beauty of foreign countries, to go from place to place untrammelled, with someone whose affection would snake life beautiful? She dared not interpret the meaning of his words, merely laughing them off with the remark that such opportunities were not likely to come her way. She must stay in London and try to find another engagement, possibly in time the money owed her might be paid, at least some of the company cherished this hope.Her host did not seem particularly interested in the recital of her future plans, he dwelt instantly on his own movements, which were, apparently, all-important in his eyes."I want you to see my house," he said. "Only a bachelor establishment, yet comfortable enough, if any place can be called comfortable without a woman's presence. I have just had a new system of lighting put in, all the electric lights are hidden, and only their reflection shines out with a mysterious glow. Often I sit over my fire late into the night, then I long for a sympathetic companion, since books are so cold and bloodless, and even my dog has died. You are in no hurry to get home, let me show you my treasures, for I have collected quite a museum of curiosities. I know theatrical landladies are very lenient, and yours will have no idea at what hour the latch-key turns."They sat for a long time over coffee and liqueurs, suddenly the man became restless as if eager to be gone. Though Julia made excuses, his dominating will swayed her with iron force, and before she realised she had consented, they were driving in the direction of a quiet house in Westminster."I shall think you cannot trust me," he murmured, "if you throw me over now. After all you are a free agent, your parents are dead, and you are alone in the world. Instead of wandering about in clothes which cannot do you justice, instead of going hungry and wearing your poor little soul out in trying to get work, you might be making the most of your youth and beauty. Of course, you know that the gods favoured you at birth. How jealous those other girls were at the theatre when they discovered the wealth of hair you could shake down over your shoulders! You told me they expected you would wear a wig for your part of Ingénue, they were surprised at the natural glory of your cloak of gold. Nature meant you for some delicate princess, it remains for man to set you on your throne."His words of flattery fell pleasantly on her ears. She felt like a dreamer compelled to obey a hypnotic voice, as she followed Frederick Reece into the house which appeared almost too artistic for a man. The panelled walls, the old furniture, and the thick pile of the carpets brought to her tired spirit such a sense of ease and restfulness, that she forgot the unconventionality of the hour. He led her to a comfortable study where low cushioned chairs invited repose before a still smouldering hearth. He flung a log on the flickering flame, which leapt up like a blue tongue, and made reflections on the ceiling."Julia," lie whispered, "have you no idea how entrancing you are? Take off your hat, lean back on these cushions, you must give me one sweet return for our cosy little feast. I have always longed to kiss you."He was kneeling at her side now, and suddenly his arms drew her closer, she felt the strength of them with rising fear. She tried to push him away, but a strange weakness over-powered her limbs, and without a protest she let his face come close to hers, while lips, which could barely veil a smile of triumph, pressed on her own a long scalding kiss of shameless passion.With a gasp of horror, which he hardly heard, she struggled free, and made a quick request."I feel a little faint," she gasped. "Have you any smelling salts in the house?"Quick to do her bidding, the man rose and moved to the door."Yes," he replied, "wait a moment, they are upstairs in my room. Just lie with your eyes closed, and you will feel all right in a minute. You shall see what an excellent nurse I can snake, I will bring some eau-de-cologne as well."As she listened to leis retreating footsteps, she rose with a shiver and looked round the room. It was like some awful trap in which a quivering animal had been caught. From head to foot a racking sense of physical pain shook her, while spiritual nausea sickened her soul.Outside there was only the hard world, and the temptation to stay was strong. As she tried to make a sudden decision her eyes fell on a sovereign case lying by a box of cigars. She hardly knew what she was doing, but the sight of the money seemed drawing her hand nearer to the little gold purse. A laugh escaped her lips, a laugh so mirthless and unnatural, she could not recognise it as her own. Quickly she seized the gold, and ran on tip-toe to the hall door. Before Reece appeared at the head of the stairs, she had slipped out into the night, carrying with her his property, containing ten gold pieces which burnt into the palm of her hand. As she ran into the dark, she was almost joyful, not yet realising the crime she had committed."He deserves to be robbed," she told herself, "for he was hunting down my soul. He wanted to make me vile like himself, to take advantage of my poverty."The boundless dangers which had surrounded her vividly filled her imagination. She had watched others slowly descend the path of shame, till premature death delivered them from the bondage of life. As she hurried on she met some of these miserable castaways, hollow-eyed and penniless, brought to the very depths through man's perfidy."His money cannot wipe out his sins," she thought, "but at least it shall help some of the sufferers here in the cold."Still strangely excited, she changed a sovereign at a coffee stall, and hurrying on, scattered the silver from right to left, finding at every turn an outstretched hand eager to grasp her stolen property. Not until one of the ten sovereigns had drifted to the gutter, did Julia pause, with reason gradually returning. She stood under a street lamp, leaning against it for support, and the remaining gold, clasped tightly in trembling fingers, suddenly appeared in it's true significance."I am a thief," she thought, "but I dare not take his money back, he might forgive me, he might draw me into that home of comfort, and ask me to believe I could find peace beneath his roof. There is one way of placing myself beyond temptation. In prison I could not escape, however strong the desire. I dare not trust myself to-night. If I could thieve I might commit any other deadly sin."She was staring before her at a light on the opposite side of the road, she could see the reflection of a helmet on the window pane, and hurrying to the door, without a moment's hesitation, she walked into the police station."What is your business?" asked the inspector, who had just rung off from the telphone.Julia placed the sovereign case with its nine pieces of gold in the man's hand."I want to give myself up," she said. "I stole this purse to-night from a gentleman's house, and am ready to take the consequences. Please return him his property, and do with me as you think best."The police officer looked at her with an expression of surprise. Certainly the innocent girlish face puzzled him, her neat dress and youthful appearance were not what he would have expected from an ordinary thief. Quickly he put her through a brief examination, taking down Frederick Reece's name and address, and asking her to wait in the custody of a constable until he had made some enquiries.Once more he turned to the telephone, and rang up the house in Westminster which Julia had robbed. She did not hear what he said to Frederick Reece, but as she waited a terrible fear possessed her lest he should come and see her. She only wanted to hide from him, and now the thought of a prison cell held some strange fascination for the twisted mind.Frederick Reece, on hearing what had occurred, drove instantly to the police station, well primed with a story which took but a moment to invent.The purse, he said, when they asked him to identify it, was certainly his own, but he had given it that very evening to Miss Dale, as he knew she was in monetary difficulties. He feared the strain of poverty had affected her head, and offered to take her back to her friends, and see she was properly cared for. His explanation was so satisfactory, the constable agreed it was the best plan to follow, and conducted Mr. Reece to the little room where Julia awaited her fate. The man strode in, holding himself very erect. He placed his hand on her shoulder, and bade her come with him in such a commanding tone she had not the courage to refuse. She thought he only wanted to get her away from the police, and would then pour the tirade of his wrath on her offending head. A thief had no right to expect pity. How could she explain it was the fear of herself and her own frail nature, which drove her to commit so desperate a deed?Once out in the now deserted thoroughfare, Frederick Reece turned to her with the strangest smile."You queer little body," he said, and his tone was lenient as one who addresses a child, "you thought prison was better than my sheltering arm. As if I should have grudged you my gold! If you had asked for fifty sovereigns, I would have flung them into your lap. You are the most original burglar who has ever made free with my property. Twice my house has been broken into, but never by youth and beauty, or I fear I should open my doors, and gladly relinquish all my property. Please keep the purse and the money, in memory of this momentous night, and when it is all spent, perhaps you will visit me again."Julia waved away the gift with protesting hands."I was beside myself," she whispered, "or I should not have done it. I could not touch your money now, but I like you for forgiving me."They were walking back together in the direction of the Westminster house.Suzanne and Velvein followed them, and the light round Julia's feet had quite gone out, only two figures clothed in darkness wandered side by side. Now they were on the steps of that old-fashioned building, and Frederick Reece bent to the lock. Then pushing the door open, he entered the dimly lighted hall."Surely she is not going in!" gasped Suzanne. "The place is full of evil spirits and she sees them. Oh! heavens, she is not going in!"Julia's feet had crossed the threshold, and the door banged with a very decided crash.Velvein drew Suzanne away. She wanted to follow, to try and speak to the girl who had reached the brink of the precipice, but for once an earth door shut her out."You cannot pass," Velvein said almost sternly. "The sorrows of shame must be veiled in darkness, you have seen enough of those tears of blood. Look! the pavement where they walked is red."CHAPTER VSUZANNE felt puzzled in spirit and deeply perplexed."Shall I ever see Julia Dale again?" she asked, as she drifted away from the city at dawn with her ruthless guide."Yes," he replied, "some day I will take you to a place where you may witness the continuation of a life which began well. You cannot picture how one false step may drag a soul down to the bottomless pit, you were cut off so young. We might stay for ever watching the histories of a city at night, but there are other and greater evils in the world which I must show you.""Where are we going now?" asked Suzanne, for the lights of the streets were paling beneath the rays from the east as they hurried away. Soon in the distance she saw a great stretch of tranquil blue flecked with white, and a sudden cry of joy escaped her."There is the sea," she cried. "I always loved it when it was calm and kind.""We are going to journey far over the ocean," said Velvein. "You shall know this great force in its many moods, which cannot harm you now. The secret of the sea is all it's own, yet it has a twinship with departed spirits, it has cradled so many dying men and women in its bosom."Suzanne grew smiling and happy as she followed her guide over the tender ripples which sang an elusive song."They remind me of my childhood," she told Velvein. "I was so thoughtless and irresponsible! These little waves seem to laugh merrily, there can be no harm in them.""For the moment," replied the angel, "this wondrous force is docile as a child, but surely you must remember that the great heart of storm lies deep down beneath the outward calm. Listen, has the sea no story for your ears?"Suzanne bent lower to the restless sun-kissed surface, and now she fancied the waves spoke to her, and that their laughter was like the mocking of a devil."We are resting after our work," they said. "Only a few nights ago we added a store of unprepared souls to our graveyard. None were ready to meet their doom. We rose so suddenly from our slumbers, they little thought we were about to claim them for our own. Oh! it was a great night's work, and stirred the whole world. Men built for themselves a palace on the deep, but we drew down their edifice with all its glitter and gold as if it were matchwood; we wanted to show them that the elements, ruled by God, have no respect for man. The earth-people are too proud of the work of their brains, sometimes they need a check to bring them to their knees.""I never thought the sea loved to be hard and ruthless," said Suzanne, as she caught again the wild free laughter which echoed so fiendishly through immeasurable space. "It seems to exult in its work of death, yet it has no black cloud of murder round it, like the shadow I saw over my father's heart.""Yes, the elements are cruel," replied Velvein. "It is to humble the proud spirit of man. The sea claims souls, but takes them quickly in its icy arms, rocking them almost immediately to slumber; only to human devices is due the long drawn out torture of the battlefield. I am going to show you the horrors of war, for men, who call themselves patriots, confuse glory with a work so infernal that hell itself could not vie with their brutal inventions. War shows the weakness and folly of human nature. It sprang into being because men were evil, and must remain so until the world is purified and freed from lust. It proves how little civilisation has advanced, despite the preachers and peace-makers whose voices are drowned by the music of battle. There the spirit of pain stalks unrestrained, and works its deadly will on man and beast. Have you any fear? Dare you look upon the ravages made by human hands over the whole nation?"Suzanne's mind was full of curiosity; fear was a thing apart, as she began clearly to discern the shortness of life."Take me where you please," she replied. "If you stay near me I can bear anything, only I would not dare to make this pilgrimage alone. You help me to understand. Am I to look on a real battlefield, or is it just a vision of the night?""No," he replied, "what you will see is actually occurring in the world you have left, the so-called Christian world which has never yet solved the true meaning of goodwill towards men. But you will be in touch with both sides, the earthly, and the heavenly, it may surprise you how closely they meet."Velvein led her to a scene such as her mind had never conceived, even when reading of the deadliest warfare. Thousands of sick and dying men were stretched across a green surface in various attitudes of torture, making that large patch of desolate country resemble a crowded fly-paper in midsummer. Shoulder to shoulder, herded together, were the writhing forms of the living, some sitting, some prone, some kneeling, others leaning against the piled-up heaps of the dead. From the distance came lines of stretcher bearers, bringing fresh victims to swell the chorus of groans and curses which rose to heaven. Just above the bodies hovered vast clouds of silent figures, some the white spirits of those recently departed, others ministering to the sufferers whom they had guarded from earliest youth. Many of the crawling forms appeared to Suzanne like denizens of the nether world, they had lost all look of humanity, their blood-drenched faces being hideous and distorted. She moved from form to form, whispering comfort, conscious they were too racked with suffering to hear the message with which she tried to soothe their dying hours."Why can't I make myself heard?" she asked Velvein. "I was trying to tell them it would be all right presently, that angels are near, waiting to bear them up. How is it I have no influence? By the old woman's bed, when you showed me the sorrows of selfishness, I brought calm at once. Now I have lost my power, you have led me here for nothing.""Suzanne," he replied, "they cannot listen to you, for each has the thought of a loved one in his heart, which outweighs the stranger's voice. There is, however, one man who has no sweet memories, for he has never loved. I will take you to where he lies, clutching at the ground, and cursing in his heart."They passed to a heap of lifeless bodies lying in a deep rut, above which mounds of dark earth seemed to have been churned by some mighty force. All around wagons, splintered and broken, lay half buried in the mire. Many of the bodies were those of grey-haired men, others appeared mere boys, with something childish in their features, now death had robbed them of pain. The one living man looked round on his dead companions with eyes that started from their sockets. He could see a group of men who dug shallow holes, in which they buried a pile of festering corpses. Only Suzanne realised how little burial mattered to the upward moving throng of strange visionary forms, released from the purgatory of living."Try and give that man just a little of your pure young love," said Velvein, with a passion of entreaty in his voice. "The angels have passed him over, for his hard heart and bitter resentment against fate made it impossible to waken response. You were alive so short a time ago, it may be different with you. Earth-bound spirits sometimes retain just sufficient human nature to reach a soul which angels cannot approach. If you are successful, your time of wandering will be shortened, and I shall not have brought you here in vain."Suzanne felt suddenly animated by a frantic desire to win the day, and bring a ray of consolation to this soul in darkness. She bent over the man, and stifling a sense of repugnance, let her spirit lips kiss the blood stained forehead with all the tenderness of a mother yearning over her child. Never before had she felt such strength of disinterested pity, such a deep and profound desire to speak to a spirit in prison."If you could only know how easily it will all end," she whispered, "you wouldn't die with those terrible curses on your lips. You would try and be glad that the struggle is over, and all the hatred you feel towards your enemies will instantly fade away when you reach the land where old quarrels are forgotten."The wounded man stirred slightly. Suddenly it seemed as if his eyes could pierce the veil, and faintly discern Suzanne's impassioned face. The lips were silent now, and a half-glimmering smile flitted over the time-worn features of the warrior."I believe he heard me," whispered Suzanne. "See! He is silent, but his heart has stirred, and there is just the faint echo of a prayer.""Yes! yes!" urged Velvein, "but you can do better. Give more of yourself, forget everything in earth or heaven, except this soul which may yet be saved by your efforts."Suzanne hung her head in shame, sorrowfully acknowledging she did not know what to do, she had so seldom tried to help anybody."Remember," whispered Velvein, "those prayers you used to repeat without thinking. Try to say them now, right into his ear, with a heart of faith. Your innocence may cleanse them, and place trust in his soul just as he passes from earth to heaven."The man stretched on the ground raised himself with difficulty, and, though he looked on the scene of horror, he could no longer discern his comrades' dead bodies. A sensation of peace dulled the physical agony and the raging thirst which had driven him half mad. He was conscious of uplifting arms, of love which had never touched him in life, but was his entirely in death. Then a cry escaped him, and all in a moment lie was standing upright facing Suzanne. They were smiling into each other's eyes, and clasping hands, they rose above the awful field of decay."You saved me from dying with a curse on my lips," he said. "I felt an angel near me, and just as death came raised my voice to God. You must be holy, for only pure spirits speak to the dying."Suzanne shook her head as she bade him good-bye."I cannot come with you," she murmured, "for I have not suffered, and I am to be earth-bound for a season. I was only able to help you because my angel told me what to do. You thought that all your comrades were dead around you, but now you see they are alive in spirit, and freed from the cruel injustice of man."Velvein guided her quickly away, for the soul which had just passed was lath to leave the one. who helped him."Your work is over," Velvein said, "but it was worth doing. Once I thought you must have failed, for on earth men were your victims, and, if a single thought of the old frivolous days had passed through your mind, the spiritual influence would have died. You shall see Hugh Carlisle when the memory of your earthly passion can no longer bind you to him. On this great field of horror there are really no dead. The bodies of these men, who appear to be slain, hold seeds of life which will ripen as all seeds do. The hand of God will lay them in the earth that they may flower again. To-morrow there will be another great battle, bloodier than the first. All earthly passions and vices must be let loose across the plain. At night the spirit world will hover once more over the fallen mass, and the dead realise that war is merely the means by which human spirits are released before their allotted span. You see that dark form coming from the south? He is 'The Black Death,' and his name is Cholera. His hand is even more dreaded than shot and shell, or the point of the bayonet, though he comes without sound and clash of arms. Men fear him because his work is sudden; but he is really a benefactor in disguise; he takes his victims quickly, and does not leave them to linger with eyes shot out, and limbs torn off. Why, even you seem to tremble as he approaches.""Yes," said Suzanne, "I always feared disease in any form. I was asked to go to a hospital once, but I could not bear the sight of the sick people on the beds. I just peeped through the door, and ran away as fast as I could. If there were any infectious illness in a house, I was never allowed near. It is rather strange I should have died so young, when every care was taken to keep me in the world. How soon will my new schooldays be over? The sorrows are beginning to feel so heavy, they weigh me down. I never pitied people before; now I keep wondering if there are other men in pain, whom I could help on that battlefield which we have left so far behind us."Velvein placed a protecting arm about her drooping form."Such a wish never game to you in life," he said. "You were a victim of environment; you were a part of all you met. Now, for the first time, you have come into vital contact with a purified atmosphere. You cannot yet grasp the mystical workings of a strange unintelligible Providence, but when you reach your higher form of being, it will all look different. Through sympathising with pain, you must gradually come in tune with the Eternal. Even in so short a time there is a change. At least your schoolmaster has taught you the divine lesson of pity. The more you feel the burden of others who suffer, the greater the chance of your early release. Trouble is on foot in the old circle where once you shone like some radiant sun, which lighted the whole of your parents' existence. I dare not tell you what the shadow is, for even to the angels the future must remain a mystery, and higher powers avert the danger at hand. Your father is sinking more deeply into an abyss from which he may never escape. Hugh Carlisle has recovered from his illness, an unexpected recovery, because remorse burnt into his heart like fire, and almost drew him to the grave. He has prayed that you might come to him, but, as yet, his prayer may not be granted. He moves about the world once again, and people who see him note how his face has changed. Some of his old friends think he meant to do evil on that night of tragedy. They turn their backs upon him with disdain, and will not let their daughters speak to the man with the bad name. He cares little what they feel or say; he only wants to stand well in the eyes of your parents, to make them believe lie loved you truly, to show them that he mourns you clay and night, and realises their sorrow. I think, perhaps, your mother understands, but your father says little, and his heart is hard as stone. He is contemplating a long thought out and deadly revenge. It may be your fate to witness the working of his evil will. All this trouble is the consequence of your folly. You were innocent as a child, but thoughtlessness may sometimes prove as far-reaching as vice."For the first time there were tears in Suzanne's eyes."I wish I could soften my father," she murmured, "but that seems so impossible, I have given up hoping."Velvein sighed, he, too, appeared weary."I am waiting for orders," he said. "I only serve, and am directed by an unseen hand.""Yet you look so bright and strong, as if you could conquer the world," said Suzanne."The world has been conquered," he replied, "but by One who is higher than the angels.""I think I see what you mean," she answered softly.Velvein smiled."No," he said, "you see nothing yet, you are only just beginning to learn."Suzanne waved helpless little hands."Velvein," she murmured, "I believe you want to torment me. You are always talking in riddles, and, even when I do as you tell me and seem to succeed, you never really praise."He turned his head away and made no answer. They were drifting back to the old country, where Suzanne had lived and died."Poor little Suzanne," he whispered under his breath. How willingly I would lift you up if you were not so frail!"He wrapped his shadowy mantle round her, and for a while it seemed her spirit slumbered and gained some meed of grace from resting near his heart. Velvein bent over the unseeing eyes and touched the deaf ears with his lips, raising his soul in prayer for the earth-hound spirit of the girl."How long?" he asked, gazing up at the silent witnesses Suzanne could not see, but they vouchsafed no answer, and he instantly knew why. The earth spirit held hint down and shackled him to her side, and he bent before the will which ordered this should be.CHAPTER VISUZANNE and Velvein stood on the brink of a wide chasm. Below them yawned depths of blackness, which neither the eyes of angels nor men could pierce. Across this gulf of dreadful stillness there gleamed in the distance a radiant glow of burnished light, so strangely magnetic, Suzanne felt herself being drawn over the brink.She gazed on it with a cry of wonder, her whole soul thrilled by passionate adoration."Velvein," she gasped, "you are holding me back! Let me go, I can see at last the heavenly city. It calls! It calls!""The souls of the blest are there," replied Velvein, "wrapped in an atmosphere of peace and love. You cannot reach them, Child of Earth. What have you done to inherit eternal rest?"Suzanne felt his restraining presence chained her down to a lower sphere, just as she realised the extraordinary attraction of purity and righteousness. Why should he keep her from that light which radiated happiness, sending forth myriad beams of brightness like living joys?"Velvein," she cried again, "you are so still and unresponsive! Won't you speak to me?"Fiercely she chafed against the force which prevented her leaving his side."I know your thoughts," said Velvein softly. "The spirit world has yet to unfold its mysteries, it is well I am here to defend you from yourself. Because we have moved unhampered through space, this abyss of darkness, which divides you from the future, holds no terror for a child with stunted wings. You had raised yourself for a flight, when I pinned you to my side. You lost the consciousness of my presence, feeling an all-mastering desire to reach that land of light without your guardian angel's help. If I had let you go, before your soul had been tried in the fires of affliction which cling to earth, you would soon have discovered your pitiful weakness. That you may know I speak the truth I will open your eyes to a great mystery, to teach you a lesson from the follies and mistakes of others. Even now, you might be lost in these depths at our feet; but for me you would have fluttered down like a wounded bird."As he spoke, a great rushing sound like the stirring of a tempest through vast avenues of trees, fell upon Suzanne's ear. Then her eyes beheld a strange enthralling sight. Huge armies of men and women clad in spirit form, arrived on the brink in eager haste, and each gazed, as she had done, straight across at the strong magnetic light, which apparently blinded them to the terrors of the abyss."Notice," whispered Velvein, "that all these disembodied souls are furnished with wings of varying size, some so small they can hardly be seen, others large, powerful and white as snow. Their faces grow bright with ecstasy as they gaze entranced on the 'Light of the World,' and all with one accord prepare to fly towards the glorious magnet. None doubt their powers of crossing the yawning gulf below, as fearlessly they hurl themselves into space, with cries of joy on their lips, and hands outstretched towards the goal. Those with the powerful wings fly safely across, and are lost to sight in the radiance beyond. Others, whose wings have no strength, fall at varying distances, some sinking almost oil the edge of the other world, while many flutter down immediately into the depths of invisible darkness."A sudden flash of terror seized Suzanne, and now she clung to her guide as if she could never let him go."Velvein," she cried, in terrible dread, "don't vanish away, don't leave me! I might be swept over by the multitude; they are coining in great masses. Can we stand against them?""Have no fear," murmured Velvein, as he watched the forms hurrying from the four quarters of the globe. "They cannot harm us, for we are standing firmly on a rock of salvation. Each answers a call, and some, like yourself, will be held back by a guardian angel, spared from this destruction because they are not wholly bad. You might have dropped down there with the lost, but for the fact that you tried, in your own light-hearted way, to live a life of goodwill towards all. You laughed through the years of youth, but evil did not lie in your thoughts and actions, and you injured no one. You were really the victim of your parents. Your soul was quite ready to follow the divine footsteps, and might have grown with your stature, had you been taught to relieve the sorrows of others. No one told you that your days were empty; you could not see your spiritual side was shrivelled and wasted like a frost-bitten flower. My voice was not strong enough to make you hear, though night and day I sought to pierce the clogging confines of earth which bound you to material pleasures. Had you listened, had you caught an echo of higher influences, your wings might have expanded. I longed to strengthen them, to cross the border immediately, that together we might taste the rapturous joys which cannot be reached as yet. When you have witnessed the sufferings and woes of men, your spirit may wax strong enough to bridge the chasm. Your earth-bound existence is less hard than sojourning in the gloom of Hades. Listen, and you will hear the sound of wailings which dim the light of the distant world. The mourners down there might have developed their wings on earth, but now the wasted time can never be recalled."Suzanne stood aghast as she discerned the great mystery of retribution. Stretching out her hands, she tried to detain those fresh arrivals, but the ever-increasing stream paid no heed to her words of warning."Stay till your wings have grown," she cried. "You will drop, you will fall, you are not strong enough to fly.""They neither see nor hear you," said Velvein, "for these are mysteries which cannot be clearly understood till you reach the final haven of 'all knowledge.' These multitudes from the ends of the world are drawn by an uncontrollable desire to reach the seventh heaven, and dazzled by that distant light they cannot see the intervening chasm. The wings which serve them ill or well are grown on their souls in life, like the wings of a butterfly when in the chrysalis. The immaculate spirits of men made perfect, instantly cross the gulf, and are at rest. Long before they left the earth these were in touch with the spiritual world, and their hearts dwelt in heaven. Conquerors of the flesh, they resisted temptation, for their life was a perpetual prayer. The distance they travel across the chasm is measured by the good that has dwelt in them. Some had time to prepare before death; others were cut off in their sins, with really no wings at all. These hurl themselves forward like moths into a flame, and learn the secret of damnation in the bottomless pit. Slowly they grow their wings of contrition, by which they may mount towards the light of resurrection. Even the basest may reach the place of the strong when the bitter waters of remorse have been consumed, and the soul of the sinner is purified through repentance. All earth feuds are forgotten; sometimes the murderer and his victim will strive together towards salvation,"Suzanne, as she listened, crouched on the rock and prayed fervently, hearing the fluttering of the million souls which hurled themselves forward, hoping to reach the joys beyond. Then she looked back on her life in silent contemplation. Suddenly a fresh fear rushed into her heart, as she asked Velvein a painful question."Will my parents be judged for bringing me up in such blind ignorance? Must they suffer like these poor mis-guided souls who are so utterly unaware of their own shortcomings? If I thought my father would fall down into that pit I would wait here to warn him, even if my wings were strong enough to carry me into bliss."Now Velvein had raised her up, and was leading her away from the glory and the sorrow which so absorbed her thoughts."You cannot choose your path," he answered, and there was a note of finality in his voice which had never sounded so musical before. "Your wish is very usual. Many would wait to warn their dear ones, but are hurried on by the swift working of Destiny. I fear your parents must pay the price, but your father may die with a blacker crime on his soul than the sin of omission. I am afraid neither you nor I could make ourselves heard, however loudly we spoke in his ear, or knocked at the door of his heart. He has sworn to kill Hugh Carlisle. Shall I show you a family scene which to the outward world would appear like a meeting of reconciliation? The man who loved you, firmly believes he is forgiven. Your parents have received him in their home, and your mother thinks, with the rest of the world, that Réné de Malincourt is convinced of your lover's innocence. He has welcomed Carlisle as one who can sympathise with his own grief. These three bereaved souls mourning your loss, have mingled their tears together; the world says they are the best of friends. But then the world so seldom knows the real state of affairs."A burning wish seized Suzanne to once more come into contact with things of earth. Since her glimpse across the gulf, she knew that the men and women of the world could have no influence over her now. Carlisle would just be one of a thousand souls, for all her human passions were dead. She saw with different eyes at last. The past seemed very far away as Velvein guided her back to the home which had gained a somewhat brighter aspect. Her room had been dismantled and all traces of its late occupant removed. Madame de Malincourt could not endure the familiar evidences of her child's existence, she felt that forgetfulness was the only possible way of escape. Even to her own relations she would not mention Suzanne's naive. They knew this much loved daughter's memory was not really shut out from the old home, and pitied the woman who made this miserable pretence.Hugh Carlisle grieved in quite a different way. He had collected every photograph which could be found of the beautiful Suzanne, that day and night he might feast his eyes upon those features which he had never seen in death. She seemed so alive to him still, he could not bear to visit her grave, and always thought of her as she looked on the night of the dance. Often he closed his eyes and felt leer again in his arms, his imagination could re-live the vivid love scene which had given him a first taste of heaven. He would not for the world have lost the rapture of that recollection, he had no wish to shut it out. Some of her dearly prized belongings, which Madame de Malincourt could not bear to see, had, at his earnest request, come into his possession. Each held a significance of its own, helping him to bear the awful sense of loneliness which her loss had left. At present he felt convinced that all his future life must be consecrated to the memory of one brief hour. The years before were those which the locusts had eaten; they held nothing of his real self; he had only found his true manhood when Suzanne crept into his arms. Until that moment he believed that his so-called love for women represented the real meaning of the word. Now lie knew his mistake. Suzanne opened the door of a fresh unspoiled world, showing him the beauties life held for those who were really lovers. The fact that she was dead made all his future seem like a period of waiting, as if he were living out his life in a mausoleum, though reason told him time must conquer every pang. At present, however, he could not believe in the soothing hand of time.Since Carlisle's recovery, and his apparent reconciliation with the de Malincourt's, Réné's outward depression fell from him in a way which surprised his still frozen wife. She envied a nature which could give vent to violent grief, and, in so short a time, recover the vivacity she never expected to see again. His temperament resembled the elements, it was a thing of swift change. Sometimes he would joke, but to Philippa his mirth was even bitterer than tears. She noted a change in the laugh which often resounded through the house where Suzanne romped as a child. It no longer rang true, and sorrowfully she would wonder what thoughts were filling his mind when he sat silently over his wine and cigars, his head sunk low on his breast. At these times he frequently failed to answer when she spoke, then, if she rose and shook his shoulder, he would start up like a man from a dream, telling her his mind had wandered away."Into pleasant channels?" she queried, on one of these occasions.His answer proved enigmatical."Into channels which are pleasant to me, but you could not follow, Philippa, for we are so differently constituted. Perhaps that is why we married; opposites are often attracted. When I speak of our child, it hurts you; you dare not even hear her name, and, but for your sensitiveness, I fear it would never be off my lips."Certainly the death of Suzanne had divided the parents instead of drawing them together. Until their bereavement Madame de Malincourt's devotion to her husband was so marked as to cause a certain secret amusement among her friends. After the tragedy she was a changed creature. The springs of her passionate love dried up, she was the victim of some contagious drought of soul. Those who came into her presence were infected by this attitude, they could not express sympathy, and longed to escape from contact with this hardened woman. On the other hand, Monsieur de Malincourt had in no way lost his attraction for those who visited their home. He showed a feverish desire to mix again with the world, an attitude which appalled Philippa, who daily shrank into her shell, unable to bear any form of society.One evening her husband returned from his business, looking almost elated."I have actually dared to invite a guest to dinner. I met Carlisle just outside, perhaps you have noticed he is often there, he looks up at one particular window where he tells me a little hand used sometimes to wave to him when he rode past our house. I want to talk to him alone, for I have a plan which might perhaps take his fancy. If his presence is too much for you I am sure he will understand if you dine in your room."Madame de Malincourt welcomed this suggestion."Any visitors," she declared, "would try me at present, but the sight of Mr. Carlisle is always extremely painful. Naturally it brings back memories which never fade, but are occasionally soothed by solitude and rest. Tell him I am glad he should keep you company, but I should be the skeleton at the feast. I have one of my very bad headaches to-day."Monsieur de Malincourt promised to make her excuses, and, as he dressed for dinner, felt glad to be alone, that no one might see the expression on his face. He stood before the glass, and looked deeply into the eyes reflected there. They hardly seemed to him like his own, and his features might have been those of a stranger, so distorted were they by the power of thought which held him in a vice.When first lie railed against Carlisle, whilst Suzanne lay dead in the adjoining room, his impulse had been to fight the man whom he still believed had schemed to betray an innocent child. As time went on lie reasoned with himself, deciding it was foolish to risk his own life, and so possibly relinquish his revenge. Night after night he lay awake, planning his future actions with diabolical deliberation. Despite a mad twist in his brain he saw clearly enough a course of action which would give him the only relief possible to attain. He believed that a sudden simple death was all too light a punishment, and to murder Carlisle openly in the streets, or kill him in a duel on English soil, might bring his own neck to a hangman's noose. No one recognised the germ of insanity which sorrow had planted in that feverish mind. Now it took the form of a craving to torture, in a way so devilish that revenge could not desire a sweeter triumph. He did not want this man to die without realising he had been victimised by Suzanne's father. Hugh Carlisle must know that Réné's hand had redressed the wrong lie had done him and the girl, whose young life was cut off through a traitor's scheme. The father wanted to gloat over Hugh's journey to the grave. Only in this way could the outraged parent drain his cup of vengeance to the dregs.To-night he had made his plan definitely. It pleased him to act friendliness towards his prey. Deep cunning developed in his troubled imagination, cunning sufficient to deceive the wife who lived at his side, and, though she knew him so well, Philippa never suspected there was any ulterior motive in his sudden friendliness towards the man who had loved Suzanne. It seemed natural that these two should come together, both grieving for the same life, each weighed down by a similar sorrow.Certainly Carlisle had felt strangely touched, when, on his recovery, Suzanne's father expressed sympathy with him in the suffering which he endured. In a voice which appeared to ring true, Monsieur de Malincourt discussed the terrible accident that hail caused them both so much grief, pretending freely to forgive Carlisle's share in the disaster.The host wore a look of elation as lie hurried downstairs to greet his visitor, who came to dinner for the first time since Suzanne's death. The room looked much the same, save that a large painting of Suzanne had been removed. He fixed his eyes upon the blank space, and, as Monsieur de Malincourt entered, he read the visitor's thoughts."That was my wife's doing," he declared. "She has put the picture upstairs, it hangs in an attic with a curtain drawn over the face. Women are very difficult to understand; sometimes I think the shock must have affected her reason.""That would not be surprising," replied Hugh in a low voice. "For men like ourselves it is hard enough to keep the balance of sanity when such sorrows come. But I am here to try and turn your thoughts; if we dwell on the past, I shall feel I am doing you harm instead of good.""My dear fellow, you are always so considerate," said de Malincourt, taking Hugh's arm in the friendly way which seemed to belong to another life, the life in which Suzanne had played so strong a part. "You and I can never forget, but we must try not to talk of our mutual trouble. You help me to bear it, because I know your sympathy is not forced or stereotyped like the many condolences I have been compelled to endure. Canon Collinson, for instance, is a man who particularly tries my nerves. He often calls to see my wife, but the very sound of his voice drives me out of the house. He is always so fond of preaching to us about resignation. I wonder, if lie felt as we do, whether lie would find it so easy. But there, I am drifting back to the old subject, and really I have something quite cheerful to talk about to-night. I am going to make a suggestion, one I hope you will fall in with, for somehow I seem to cling to you because you are a link with our child. You say she cared for you, and that you meant her no harm. All who were dear to her must be dear to me. Only a devil would wish to injure one who never caused anybody a moment's pain."It sounded natural enough, the sudden break in his voice as he hissed forth the last sentence. It revealed to Carlisle the bitterness of the man's soul, though he little guessed what foul suspicions seethed in his host's mind, as they strolled together to the dining room."Now let me hear your plan," said Carlisle, as they seated themselves at the cosy table with its shaded lights and delicate fragrance of flowers. "If I can do anything to help you I think I need hardly say I am at your service."Monsieur de Malincourt paused for a moment, leaning with his elbow on the table and his chin in his hand. He seemed to look beyond Carlisle, and there was something of triumph in his eyes."I have the greatest desire," he said, "to take a trip to Paris. I feel nothing would change my train of thought and give me fresh life like a breath of my native air. Philippa will not hear of going away; she has neither the energy to talk or move, she is still the woman of stone who followed our daughter to the grave without a tear. It would depress me to travel alone. Will you come with me, and let us bear our trouble together? I have told Philippa my idea, and she begs that you will consent. I suppose it is foolish, but I am so run down and unnerved, I feel almost afraid to go by myself. Would it be possible for you to get away? Could you by any chance start next week?"The proposal certainly surprised Hugh Carlisle, for he had no idea Suzanne's father liked him sufficiently to really desire his company for any length of time. Now the eager eyes were riveted upon him with pleading in their depths. A spot of colour had rushed into the wasted cheeks, the nervous foreign hands twitched as they crumbled the bread which lay against his plate. Evidently this meant much to the one who had passed through such dark days of sorrow. It was natural enough to desire a change of scene after such a blow. Though Carlisle had really no wish to go to Paris, for the sake of Suzanne's father, lie could not bring himself to decline. Feeling bound to make an effort, and really believing he might bring Réné to a more cheerful frame of mind, he nodded his head with a smile of consent."It is quite a good idea," he said. "I will certainly come, if only for a few days. The doctor wanted me to go away, but I felt disinclined for any sort of trip, and I suppose it will be some time before I am myself again. Your wish to go to Paris makes an excellent opportunity, for perhaps you can guess my days have been very empty just lately. I have almost become a recluse, this is the only house I can visit with any sense of relief to my overburdened mind. It is good to feel that you and Madame de Malincourt have not lost confidence in me; but for your kindly attitude, I think I should have gone under altogether."A look of extraordinary relief passed over the Frenchman's features. He held his breath while waiting for Carlisle's answer, and now his face was wreathed in smiles, while his manner became so animated as to appear almost hysterical."Ah! that is good, that is good," he cried, holding out his hand which Hugh took reluctantly, owing to his English reserve. He felt glad that his consent could delight the bereaved man, changing him into an almost cheerful companion."Perhaps," said Réné, "I have quite an unusual love of the place where I was born, which is within easy reach of Paris. I still own some land there, and the ruins of a romantic and beautiful old castle. Only a year ago Suzanne and I wandered through that deserted place, and talked of restoring it. She laughingly said, if she ever married she would rather live there than anywhere else in the world; but it would take a lot of rebuilding. Hardly any of the castle remains intact, save the gloomy old dungeon which has recently been used as an ice house."With keen enthusiasm he described the surrounding scenery, the beauties of the sunsets, and the wildness of the neighbourhood."You would never think you were so near a great city. It is one of the most picturesque spots in France, or perhaps I am prejudiced, associations count for much. Anyway, you must judge for yourself; and I shall try and repay you for enduring a dull companion."Further plans were discussed, the date of departure, the train, and the hotel at which they would stay in Paris.Hugh Carlisle gradually became infected by de Malincourt's eager anticipation. This would be yet another link with Suzanne, to gaze on the scenes she had loved—to picture her flitting in and out of those ivy covered walls. Possibly there her spirit would speak to him as it could not do in more frequented places, he might find peace in a solitude which had appealed to her in life.When eventually he left, his host stood on the steps, watching the retreating figure with an uncanny smile.Hugh Carlisle felt a vague sense of oppression as lie moved away, the reaction he supposed after Monsieur de Malincourt's almost unnatural levity. He started as he heard his host slain the door, imagining the echo boomed and thundered in his brain."It is certainly time I went away," he told himself. "I am almost frightened of my own shadow. I, who always scoffed at nerves"Suddenly he fancied a voice whispered in his car two simple words: "Don't go! Don't go!""Why not?" lie said aloud, so clear was the warning lie could fancy it was at his elbow.No answer came, only the wind seemed to repeat the saline entreaty. As it whistled round the chimneys and swayed the trees above, it cried with renewed force Don't go! Don't go!""How little he thinks I am near him to-night," said Suzanne, who for the first time since her death had been permitted a glimpse of Hugh Carlisle. "He looks so changed I should hardly have known him. Why is he surrounded with danger? It seems as if father had thrown a cloak over him to blind his eyes. I believe something terrible will happen if lie goes to Paris. If only I could make him obey my warning!"The angel looked with sorrowful eyes on the man's hurrying form."He is not strong enough," said Velvein, "to know that the powers of evil surround him. He lost his keen insight into character when a boy. Women keep their intuitions longer than men, and reason is telling him that our warning voices merely exist in the realms of fancy. That is why so many men fail in life, they trust to what they call common sense, not the finer sense of the spirit, which can never be called common.""Who was that horrible man with a masked face?" asked Suzanne, "I mean the dark figure on the doorstep, which frightened me so, I dared not go into my old home."Carlisle was passing a church. The tower clock struck at that moment, its sound falling with faint familiarity on Suzanne's ears."I used to listen to the striking of that clock in life," she murmured.Velvein drew her under the shadow of the porch."It tells men how quickly they are nearing eternity, but they never think of this when listening for the time. The dark figure in the mask was the father you once loved; I am not surprised you could not recognise him."Suzanne shuddered, for she knew it was the sorrow of her death which had made him what he was."If I had been less head-strong," she murmured, "I might have lived on. He is paying for a few moments of my pleasure, which I could well have sacrificed. Can I make any reparation for my thoughtlessness?""Deep down in the abyss I showed you to-day," said Velvein, "reparation is the word on every lip, some can atone even there, but it is not given to all.""Look!" whispered Suzanne, "the man in the mask, whom you say is my father, has just come into the churchyard. He is groping his way towards my grave."She watched him kneel by a mound, and raise his hands to heaven."He cannot be altogether bad, for he is thanking God for some benefit."Velvein covered his face with his wings."No," he said, "Réné de Malincourt is crying to the powers of hell, and blessing the devils who gladly help in the work of sin. Listen how they laugh from their realms of everlasting night. He does not pray 'Deliver me from blood-guiltiness.' Instead, he offers thanks that his unholy guides permit him to strike secretly."CHAPTER VIIAs Monsieur de Malincourt and Hugh Carlisle travelled to Paris, it seemed that a change came over them both. To Hugh, the awful happenings of the past were more like an evil dream now, for his companion's rising spirits made it difficult to believe an overwhelming calamity had fallen on their lives. Only now and again the older man's vivacity and the foreign movements of his hands vividly reminded Hugh of the dead girl lie had loved."The past scenes of my youth," said Monsieur de Malincourt, "always revive my energies, and make a new man of me. After all, there is nothing like travel to prevent the broken-hearted from dwelling on their grief. Now I am away from home I find myself wondering how I shall ever go back to the neighbourhood which holds such terrible memories. Philippa thinks I am in a very erratic mood, for I threatened to start off on a long tour all alone. It is good to mix with people who cannot remind one of trouble. All my friends at home were getting on my nerves. When they saw me coining in the distance, they would stop smiling and draw long faces. Everybody seemed in league to remind me I was a mourner, though heaven knows I needed no reminding. You are a free agent, Carlisle, I wonder you don't go away for some months, we would wander about together, and return different men."There was a certain allurement in the idea, and that night, as they dined at the Paris restaurant, they drew out a scheme of a tour through Morocco. Carlisle found Monsieur de Malincourt a far pleasanter companion than he had thought possible. His intimate knowledge of Paris was a delight to the Englishman. They spent the night in a round of pleasure, with which they tried to drown the misery in their hearts. It was a feverish effort to escape from the near past, and, though wholly artificial, soothed their senses for a time.Monsieur de Malincourt suggested they should be independent the following morning, as he wished to meet some business friends and would be up early. The day after, he hoped to show Carlisle his old home, the ruined castle so dear to Suzanne's heart."Yes," replied Hugh. "I am eager to see the place which I remember she described to me one day when we discussed the beauties of France. The conversation flashed across my memory soon after I left your house the other evening."Monsieur de Malincourt looked pleased at his friend's interest, replying he did not think the old place would disappoint the visitor."There is a strange enchantment about it," he said, "perhaps from the loneliness of its surroundings and the picturesque manner in which it has fallen to ruin. The peasants are quite superstitious about that spot, for many strange stories hang to its memory. The spirits of the old French nobles who dwelt there in early days are still supposed to hover about the place, giving an added interest to a spot which must appeal to all lovers of romance."Early the following morning, Réné rose after a sleepless night, and, unknown to his friend, went alone to the old castle which had been the property of the de Malincourts for centuries. The day was sunless, and the place seemed in tune with its owner's mood."My child's murderer thinks I am able to enjoy," said Réné to himself, laughing aloud as he spoke the words, a laugh which held the ring of madness. "He has come to try and shake me free from a spell of grief. He is making an effort to forget, and believes that I, too, wish to escape from those burning memories that cannot be killed so easily. Only in one way could the wrong he did me be redressed. When I have calmed my craving for revenge I shall, perhaps, face the world again with a light heart. My ancestors were called cruel in ancient days; the de Malincourts always trod their enemies under foot. I know the stories of torture are true, I have found evidences in the old home where once they successfully conquered their foes. Carlisle will walk all unsuspectingly to his doom. My revenge will be greater than any in those dark annals which make up the history of our family. When I have placed my enemy in his living tomb, I can taunt him to my heart's content, and openly call him the slayer of my child."A warm glow stirred Réné's blood as lie gloated in imagination over the agony to be heaped upon the man who had ruined his life. The distraught brain developed such deep cunning that the plan it conceived was feasible.On reaching the ruined castle, he walked slowly down the moss-covered steps which led to the door of an old dungeon, the only place which had always been kept closed. This was no ruin, but stood intact, being the dungeon he described to Carlisle, when first they spoke of their trip to Paris.Réné had driven from the station, for he carried a small portmanteau with mysterious contents. Once alone, he brought out a can of oil, with which he lubricated the lock of the dungeon door, eventually turning an old rusty key, which at first resisted the pressure of his trembling hands. The heavy door creaked as it swung back, revealing the dark cavern which had quite recently been used as an ice house.Drawing a deep breath he entered the silent tomb, and, with a thrill of elation, commenced his hasty work. He had brought various tools in the bag, and with these he skilfully drove an opening for the admittance of a speaking-tube from the roof, reached by a small ladder borrowed from a farmhouse on the property. He pretended to the farmer he wished to inspect the walls of the ruin, and the simple man, knowing the master well, had no reason to suspect any evil intent. For many hours Réné remained on that lonely site, eventually relocking the dungeon door and returning to Paris in a wildly excited frame of mind.He told Carlisle that the business which occupied him must extend to the following morning, so that they would postpone their visit to his old home until the day after to-morrow.Once again he rose early, drove to the station, and returned to the ruin, unknown to anyone. Now he carried a speaking-tube and materials for fitting. A harmless enough machine also formed part of his luggage, unlike any of the instruments of torture which had been sent from the old castle to a Paris museum. It was merely a modern gramophone which he brought with him from England, containing a record, taken in Suzanne's lifetime, of her singing and reciting a dramatic sketch. This he fixed out of reach in the roof, with a wire through the tube, which could be wound up by a pull from the outside, an arrangement to set back the record when desired. The work done, he shouldered the ladder, borrowed yesterday, and carried it back to the farm. He was a great favourite with the peasants in the neighbourhood, for he had always been generous with his money and it was their custom to come out and bless him as he passed. He did not tell them of his daughter's death, for he knew well the hysterical nature of these people, and wished to avoid the tears they would shed over him if he spoke of his trouble."Yes," he replied to their eager enquiries, "Madame and Mademoiselle were in the best of health."The old farmer rubbed his hands as he recalled Mademoiselle de Malincourt's last visit to his home."Ah! She is a lively lady," he declared, smiling as he remembered a happy afternoon. "She played with our children as if she were one of them, and sang a little chanson to my wife, which we have never forgotten. Bring her next time you come, Monsieur, for she so loved that day you took your lunch in the ruins.""Yes," replied the father, "it is time her voice was heard there again, I will not forget what you say."As he strode in the direction of the station, the farmer's wife, whose intuition was keener than that of her husband, followed the departing figure with doubtful eyes."Monsieur has changed," she said. "There is something so different about him, though he seems gay and laughs often. Did you not notice the black lines round his eyes, and how thin his neck had grown, his hands, too, were like those of a skeleton? Every time he laughed he frightened me, and, when he talked of his daughter, I fancied I saw some shadow on his face. I should not be surprised to hear evil had befallen that beautiful young lady. Possibly she is causing him anxiety, for good looks are not always a blessing to the young and reckless. It seems queer he should come here two days running, all by himself. The castle is not a cheerful spot in which to spend a lonely morning."Her husband shook his head disdainfully, as he listened to the pessimistic words."You are too imaginative by far. I have never seen Monsieur in better spirits; as to his thinness, well, nobody grows younger, and with age, you fatten or grow thin according to health. I think he is a gentleman who enjoys the pleasures of the city, and late hours would account for his tired eyes. I hope he may be thinking of restoring the castle, that is his daughter's great wish. You remember she promised us she would try and do this when she married, if her husband had money enough to rebuild the old home. Madame de Malincourt is very wealthy, but she never liked the place. She said it was full of ghosts, and that she would die of ennui if they brought her there."When Hugh Carlisle met Réné again they had much to talk of, for the idea of a trip to Morocco had developed during the last two days into a serious intention."I have written to my people," said Hugh, "to tell them I may not return for several months. They know how restless I am, and I have warned my mother not to be alarmed if she does not hear from me for some time. I shall go up country and rough it a bit. I want to get away from civilisation, for these two days in Paris show me I am not the least in tune with this sort of life. Sorrows cannot be drowned by outward gaiety and pleasure, which seem so hollow when it is an effort to endure them."Réné quite agreed, saying he, too, had found it difficult to re-live the life which made Paris so pleasant in his young days."It will be refreshing," he declared, "to get into the country to-morrow. I am counting the hours to see my old home again, and I only hope I may raise in your heart some slight enthusiasm for the place I love. We will breakfast in good time and catch the morning train. There are no restaurants in that part of the world, so we had better take some food with us, as we shall not want to return in a starving condition. Starvation must be such a very unpleasant experience. I, for one, have never been really hungry enough to appreciate the sensation."Hugh Carlisle wondered what Réné saw so very amusing in this remark. He laughed for some moments inordinately, as though unaware the hidden jest was not shared by his puzzled companion."I am not afraid of hunger," said Hugh. "I could go all day without food, if I knew I was returning for dinner. Personally, I should not trouble to take provisions; bread and cheese at a farmhouse would quite satisfy me, and make a pleasant change.""As you will," replied his companion, "only I always find the country air gives me an appetite. You have had no exercise lately, and I was going to suggest we should walk from the station, a matter of perhaps three miles. You will be charmed with the scenery, and now the weather has suddenly changed, I think we may look forward to a sunny day. I must send my wife a line to let her know our movements; being so busy, I have not had a moment to write letters all day."As he penned a hurried note to Philippa, he made up a story which would play into his hands."Hugh Carlisle," he wrote, "is not a very good companion for me; his restlessness is a little disturbing. He is anxious I should accompany him to Morocco, but I have no intention of doing this. He is going, in a foolhardy manner, to travel up the country without proper escort, and I happen to know that life is not safe in the places he wishes to visit. I have tried to stop him from taking such a rash tour, but nothing I can say will alter his decision. It almost seems as if he wants to die."As Monsieur de Malincourt read the words, he nodded his head in silent satisfaction."When Carlisle disappears," he thought, "everyone will say he hurried off to seek forgetfulness, and was murdered in those mountain regions I warned him not to visit."Hugh was already growing tired of Paris, and welcomed the thought of a day in the country. Both men breakfasted early, and the bright sunshine streaming through the window, fulfilled Monsieur de Malincourt's prophecy."I told you we should have a fine day," he said, waving his hands in the direction of the unclouded sky. "The château will look its best, less gloomy than usual, perhaps, but one feels the presence of ghosts there, even in broad daylight."The journey was not a long one to Sainte Bruyèe, and Hugh Carlisle, who loved exercise, refused Monsieur de Malincourt's somewhat faint-hearted offer of a cab.As they strode away down the straight white road, bordered by apple trees, the atmosphere of the place took a hold upon Carlisle's imagination, for well he knew they were nearing a spot loved by Suzanne in life. As a child she had often been taken there to play in the woods, surrounded by meadows sloping to a village, whose red-tiled roofs could be vaguely discerned in the distance. The peasants they passed on the road were like figures from a play. One old man, seated outside his cottage, smiled and touched his black velvet cap as they passed. He had a shrewd Socratic face, which might have been working out problems, as he bent over a horn snuff box, his white forked beard spreading itself across a much worn vest, the colour of dead leaves."That is one of our oldest inhabitants," said Monsieur de Malincourt. "Suzanne always talked to him, because he had such a sense of humour, and never said anything depressing. We only let her visit the poor people here who were strong, cheerful and well. Of course, in the town she saw nothing of the lower life."Hugh pointed to a group of young men, wet to the knees, crossing the meadow with fishing tackle on their shoulders."What are they hoping to catch?" he asked."Those are fishers for frogs," replied Réné, "a dish which is never popular to an English palate. I think this place is really delightful at all times of the year. I was last here in the autumn, when the fires of dried stems from the potato fields were sending up their blue smoke into the red October evening. It is wonderful how some of these people live on the modest produce of the fields."Hugh was so engrossed by the scenery, he hardly listened to his companion's conversation. The vast orchard stretching for miles, the grey blue hills in the distance, and the river winding its course through a valley of osier beds, filled his soul with a sense of rural peace. Here, the rows of poplars no longer looked like melancholy sentinels, as they rocked with mirth in the fresh breeze."I wish I were an artist," he said at last, "to spend my time sketching this place in its different moods. I should come when the apricot tree first began to put on its white covering of flowers, that would be in April, I suppose. Later, I should give myself up to a debauch in pearly tones, flowering grasses and half-dry hay. The trees on the banks of the stream would stand out strongly with a Japanese effect."As he mentioned the hay, Monsieur de Malincourt shuddered."Last time Suzanne and I were here they were haymaking," he said. "I can see her now pretending to take part in the life of the fields, so excited, poor town-bred child, she seemed half intoxicated with the smell of the hay. To me, she was like a young tree, full of sap and promising blossom, then in a single night a murderous frost destroyed it all. Oh! forgive me, I did not mean to hurt you, my dear friend. For the moment I forgot that my words might appear personal."Monsieur bowed with all the courtesy of his French breeding.Hugh Carlisle set his teeth, feeling no resentment, but conscious the remark was well deserved. To-day the beauty of the world expressed itself in everything, and this wild stretch of country appeared full of pathos and poetry. He felt passionately moved by the sentiment of the scene. Weeds, stones, sticks, even the clods of earth, all held some meaning, in this colour-riot of daylight and fresh air. He was filled with a sense of the sweetness of Nature and the beauty of the open fields. It made a distinct call on the primitive side of his manhood, and caused him thankfulness that he still had a feeling for beauty. The words of Blake returned to his mind: "To see a world in a grain of sand, and heaven in a wild flower."Monsieur de Malincourt really saw nothing of Nature's outward joy. Though the sun shone brightly, the landscape in his eyes took a form of general dimness. He forced the scene to tone with his own black mood. A sense of desolation, decay, and impending death hung in the air which appeared so fresh and invigorating to his companion. Now and again some flash of sardonic humour broke from his lips."If I were a painter," he said, "I should not trouble the country for inspiration. Did you ever see that dare-devil sketch by Marie Bashkirtseff of a nude model sitting astride on a chair, looking at a skeleton, between the lips of which she had stuck a pipe, while waiting for the artist? The contrast of this fair young girl in her fresh exuberance of form, facing the skeleton with a challenging attitude, is a piece of audacity quite unparalleled in art!"Monsieur de Malincourt's bizarre description sullied the pure glow of the morning. Hugh Carlisle had seldom been more conscious of acute sensitiveness. The thought of Suzanne had never left his mind since early morning. He hoped when they reached the ruin, that her father would at least grant him a few moments to himself.Suddenly a bend in the road brought them in full view of the disused château. It was a dark and frowning edifice, left entirely au diable, a relic of old days, where men of noble manners, calm, proud and haughty, walked, talked, slept and died, filled with contempt for their bourgeois neighbours. The trees which encircled the crumbling walls were dark of foliage, and the creepers, which had hastened the structure's decay, resembled ash-coloured draperies, falling from pinnacles which once withstood the storm of siege."Do you see," said Monsieur de Malincourt, "how the far wall stands out against the sky like a human profile, sharply in silhouette? That was the wing in which an ancestor of mine found his wife in the arms of her lover. The intruder was gently removed to a dungeon, the historical dungeon where many victims rotted and died. You must go down and inspect our celebrated bloodstains, which, I can assure you, are never replenished like the proverbial red paint of Holyrood, since we are too far away to entertain excursionists."They were passing down a narrow lane, impregnated with country odours, the scent of freshly-mown grass came pungently to their nostrils, and but for memory's clogging hand, both men must have felt it was good to be alive."I have purposely avoided passing the farm," said Monsieur de Malincourt, "for the good man there and his wife would have delayed us, they are such talkers. We may go there later, if you prefer to eat your food at a table. I am quite hungry already, and I hope you also are working up a good appetite."Hugh Carlisle was too interested to think of food. Now, as he approached the château, he realised why Suzanne had loved the place. It was so utterly different from her English home, so elusive in its weird beauty, it could not fail to make a strong appeal to all who loved adventure and old world associations.Monsieur de Malincourt certainly looked pleased, as his guest waxed enthusiastic over the remnant of this ancestral home."If I were a wealthy man," said Carlisle, "I should make a bid for the place and restore it, if only for the sake of the view it commands. I suppose the dungeon is the most interesting part, since you were telling me it had been preserved as an ice-house, so still remains intact?""Yes," replied Réné, warming to the subject. "It is certainly a queer old place, and some writing cut on the wall in the far corner will especially interest you. It is supposed to be the last word of a starving man, whose bones were found there in 1798."The speaker drew a large key from his pocket, and beckoning Hugh to follow him down the crumbling grey-lichened stairs, he unlocked a massive door, which creaked dolefully as it swung back on its rusty hinges.Black darkness faced them, an atmosphere so dense it entirely baffled the eyes which peered curiously into the unholy void."I always provide myself with a taper when I come here," said Monsieur de Malincourt, drawing some matches from his pocket. "After a few moments, the dungeon does not seem so dark. You must remember we have come straight from the bright sunlight."All unsuspectingly Hugh Carlisle took the lighted taper from his friend's hand, and eager to explore this historical cavern of gloom, made his way to the opposite wall where some old chains still hung, to which the prisoners had been fastened."Can you see the writing?" called Monsieur de Malincourt. "Look up, it is just above your head now, if you raise the light you will see it exactly over that iron hook."Carlisle lifted his head and hand simultaneously, and just as he tried to discern some deeply cut letters, evidently engraved by a man of gigantic stature, a strange sound caught his ear. It was the sudden violent slamming of the great dungeon door, followed almost instantly by the ominous turning of the key, and capped by a wild fit of mad laughter, which echoed and re-echoed through the desolate ruin.CHAPTER VIIIFOR a moment Carlisle stood spellbound, his brain hardly able to grasp what had really occurred. Like a man in the throes of some ghastly nightmare he rushed across the dungeon still holding his taper aloft. With frantic efforts he struggled to force back the iron-clamped door which a fiendish hand had locked against him."De Malincourt!" he called, "this isn't a nice sort of joke to play. I must insist on your letting me out at once."Réné's voice reached him now clearly enough through the speaking-tube. He might have been standing beside his victim, so near and distinct were the words which doomed the imprisoned man as surely as if a black-capped judge had passed sentence of death."Your hands," said the voice, "are soiled with the blood of my only child. This is my revenge upon Suzanne's murderer; the key I have turned upon you is the key of death and hell. You will never come out again into the light which you shut for all time from my heart. You must rot and decay in your living tomb, as others have done whose crimes were more excusable than your outrage on youth and innocence. You snared your prey as a guileless bird is lured into a trap, you meant to tarnish her soul. How could you expect forgiveness for that? Every time I smiled upon you I longed to plunge a knife into your loathsome body. Each day I endured your presence, simply because I knew the hours brought you nearer to your fate. Here, in the home of Suzanne's ancestors, who guarded the honour of their women with their lives, you must pay the price of your dastardly deed. A common death was too good for such as you, otherwise I should have shot you like a dog. I wish I could see you cowering now on the stones which cry for vengeance; your seducer's spirit must tremble at last beneath the lash of destiny. Not a living creature knows or cares that we are here, all the country-side avoid these ruins. If your moaning were heard they would only say that ghosts walked, and hurry away in terror. So, my friend, you are safe and fast in the grip of the grave. Only, before hunger and thirst bring you to the jaws of death, I shall entertain you with the voice of your victim, that you may hear again the laughter your devilry silenced so successfully."As Réné's diabolical scheme was deliberately explained through the speaking tube, the terrible reality of de Malincourt's plot paralysed Carlisle's brain. He was leaning against the wall now, holding aloft the taper which must soon burn down, leaving him in unfathomable darkness. Already those gaunt spectres, hunger and thirst, lurked in imagination round the man who felt stifled by the confining walls. Cold drops of sweat broke on his forehead, as all the horrors of being buried alive rushed through his mind with painful clearness.He knew, for a certainty, de Malincourt must be mad, fiercely blaming his own short-sighted policy in making a friend of Suzanne's bereaved father. Even now, if he concealed his fear, he might argue with the maniac, and induce him to alter his deadly decision."Look here," he said, in a voice so steady it might have deceived even a sane listener, "there are sweeter things in the world than revenge. Open this door, and in return I will restore your grim ruin and build up a château which will prove the pride of your old age. Every penny I possess shall be devoted to the work. You and I will do it together as a memorial to the girl I never harmed by word or deed. Her purity was safe in my hands; I loved her for it, and would have made her my wife. The evening she died some youthful folly changed us into children. Because you are evil yourself, you judge others without reason and without thought. Come, open the door, and let us arrange about the improvements. We will build a chapel dedicated to Suzanne, where prayers for the dead shall be offered night and day. If you hesitate, I may change my mind, it is foolish to think you can frighten me with these threats."Carlisle was exerting a mighty power of will force, wondering how it was possible his voice could sound so natural and so calm. In reality fear claimed him for its own, as his bloodshot eyes watched the flame steadily creep downward. When the awful darkness fell upon him, would he still be able to keep hold upon his reason?Monsieur de Malincourt merely answered his victim by wild peals of mad mirth, which resounded through the ruins."Suzanne," he called, "Suzanne, come and sing to the gentleman in hell."Clutching a wire, he set free the record which let a mocking chansonette into her lover's mausoleum.Well Carlisle remembered the fresh sweetness of the voice and its piquante raillery as it sang the haunting refrain of "Si vous Saviez."The words were broken by trills of tuneful laughter set to music. The song told of a girlish passion. "Mais comme je vous aime!" uttered tremulously after scales of rippling joy. "Mais! c'est une véritée, si vous saviez—Une fois! Une fois."Then the singer, to shew versatility, began a dramatic recitation on the subject of death:"On ne peut pas mourir quand on est charmant, aimable. Il me semble toujours que l'hiver revient, c'est affreux, la mort, elle est si laide, mais c'est une grande émotion! Pourquoi vivre? La mort presente a moins cet avantage, d'apprendre ce que c'est que cette fameuse autre vie. A moins qu'il n'y ait rien: c'est ce qu'on sait, en fin quand on meurt."As the words faded away Carlisle's taper went out. From head to foot he was trembling violently. Until this added agony of song and recitation came to taunt him in his misery he had kept his self control. Now he groped his way to the door blindly, and beat upon it till hands and knuckles were covered in bleeding scars.Réné de Malincourt listened with an expression of satisfaction."You can give me great happiness, monsieur, for I see you appreciate what I am doing for you," he said sarcastically. "You must agree this is just retribution for the dastardly murder of my daughter. As I declared before, an ordinary death would prove no adequate punishment for such as you. My wrath can only be appeased by inflicting slow, lingering torture. Your life shall gradually ebb away, and in the darkness of your tomb I will daily return to regale you with the light laughter and song of my dead Suzanne. I have proved that I can bring her deriding voice into your sepulchre. I wish you a very good-night, and will not forget to think of you when I dine alone this evening. I shall drink to the health of all who sip the sweets of a longed-for revenge."Laughing softly to himself, Réné stole away in the sunlight which glorified the old ruin, making it a spot of magic enchantment."I shall just be in time," he said, consulting his watch, "to catch the early train back to Paris. The morning's work has been good, extremely good."In the desolation of his prison, Hugh Carlisle still clung to a last ray of hope, which must always remain while breath is in the body. Possibly, he told himself, de Malincourt would be mad enough to boast of his deed, in which case surely, a search party would be sent to Sainte Bruyére. There was a farmhouse on the estate, someone might pass and hear the prisoner's shout, for few really believed ghosts would call loudly for help in broad daylight. Carrying this idea into practice, his throat grew parched after a prolonged effort to make himself heard. The walls were so dull and heavy they seemed to throw his voice back in his face, and all the time he knew how strangely futile the effort must prove. He tried to reap some small consolation from the thought that Réné spoke of returning the following day. If his actions were suspicious he might be followed, especially as his travelling companion had given no notice of not returning to the hotel."The actual threat of doing me to death," said Carlisle, "may be bluff on his part. Surely, to-morrow he will open the door, feeling I have been sufficiently punished for the misfortune he calls a crime."The tortured man was making a desperate effort not to break down, but as the dreary hours of darkness passed he lost count of time, and became a prey to the most hideous emotions. He thought of buried miners, so often entombed and rescued too late. At least, they had the comfort of knowing that frantic efforts were being made on their behalf. But here, in this dungeon of cruelty, already marked by murderous bloodstains, all human sympathy was denied. He was as much alone as if lie lay beneath a coffin lid under the graveyard's sod."Suzanne!" he cried. "I am, indeed, paying a price for our wild evening together. Your kisses held heaven, yet they have dragged me down to the very depths. No wonder the loss of you should break a brain, fool that I was not to read madness in de Malincourt's eyes. Still, he is no ordinary maniac, his methods are too cunning in their dia-bolical cleverness. If he leaves me to rot here as he threatens, God grant death may release me quickly from the hand of my tormentor."All the memories of his past life rushed vividly through Hugh Carlisle's distraught mind. He saw himself as a child in the old home of fun and frolic. Then came the days of Eton and the happy Cambridge years. After that he lost something of the freshness of his manhood, many a wild intrigue, subsequently regretted, warned him that he was not fit to die. Never until Suzanne woke all that was best in his heart, had he loved in a true way. Then, for the first time, reverence and adoration woke in his soul. His passion for her would have developed almost into a religion, so deeply rooted were the feelings her beauty stirred to life. In this place of anguish, as he thought of Suzanne, he tried to pray: "Lord, deliver me from the body of this death."Gradually a merciful apathy seized him, his limbs became paralysed, his brain numb. He closed his eyes, seeing again the fresh country which made such a strong appeal to him only that morning. He almost believed his sub-conscious self had known during that walk what was about to happen, making him doubly appreciate the scent of the summer world and the beauty of growing nature.Suddenly he became certain that he would never escape to gaze again across a country landscape, revelling in the sense of space under a sun-blessed sky. The outer world had closed her doors upon him, he had gone down into the pit, he was lost with the "spirits in prison."CHAPTER IXMONSIEUR DE MALINCOURT appeared radiant as he returned to Paris with his dreadful secret. People who noticed him in passing smiled involuntarily, recognising him as a man whose heart contained some great joy."He is in love, and the fates favour him," they thought, "or he has come into a large fortune."At the hotel his elated manner was also obvious to the attendants. He had a bright word for everyone, while he stopped to joke and laugh with a few old friends he happened to meet. They were surprised at his mood, knowing how deeply he felt the loss of his daughter.He told the manager that Mr. Carlisle had been suddenly called away on business, and wished him to settle the bill. Not a shade of suspicion attached itself to this remark, for Réné's brightness was contagious, and no one suspected him of crime.It seemed, at last, that the sorrow he endured since his bereavement was lifted from his shoulders, and he could face the world again with a growing sense of satisfaction. His desire for revenge was appeased as he gloated over the fate of his enemy.He ate heartily that night, and enjoyed the finest brand of champagne procurable, thinking as he dined of Carlisle's hunger and thirst in the awful darkness of the dungeon. He could hardly wait for the following day, so anxious was he to return and taunt his victim through the speaking-tube. In his dreams he saw the emaciated face of the entombed man, and heard once more the laughter and song from the pitiless record which made merry with a dead voice.There was no remorse in his soul, as once again he started out for Sainte Bruyére. He speculated as to how long Carlisle would linger, feeling that his own object in life would be over, when he could no longer torment his helpless victim. As he walked from the station he remembered vividly their conversation of the previous day, how enthusiastically Carlisle praised the scenery, with what apparent pleasure he inhaled the country air."How little he thought what was in my mind!" said Réné to himself, recalling the keen pleasure with which he noted the strength of Carlisle's manhood, wondering how long it would take to reduce him to a skeleton. Glancing down at his own wasted form, Monsieur de Malincourt told himself he could not live even one day under such conditions."Carlisle is made of sterner stuff," he thought, "and will die hard. It was amusing to hear him trying to bluff me about buying the castle, he thought I should be fool enough to believe his words and open the door at his dictation."As Réné came in sight of the château, he rubbed his hands together, and heaved a deep sigh of satisfaction."I never thought the old place would afford me such exquisite pleasure," he said. "Suzanne loved it, so it is good her lover should die on the spot she longed to inhabit if her life had been spared. How loudly the birds sing to-day, they almost hurt my head!"He placed his hands to his temples, which were throbbing painfully. Though it was morning, the ruins appeared bathed in the ruddy glow of sunset, everything he looked at turned a deep blood red.Cautiously, he glanced round upon the desolate scene, before making his way to the dungeon steps. Then, trembling with excitement, he let his voice penetrate into the tomb through the speaking-tube which had served his purpose so well on the previous day."Good-morning, Carlisle," he cried, in a voice of tantalising humour. "How have you fared since last we met? It isn't so very long for those who have feasted and slept in comfort, but doubtless to you it is an eternity since we walked together. The air is very fresh outside, a little breezier than yesterday, it braced me up after a late night in Paris."For hours Carlisle had been lying face downwards, enduring the horror of this slow death. Hunger and thirst had seized him in a vice, and, for certain merciful periods, unconsciousness saved him from the torments of the living tomb.Now, as he heard the voice, he dragged himself to his feet, and rushed with a cry to beat once again on the door and entreat for mercy. Surely the man who had planned such a hideous revenge would be duly satisfied, seeing his victim was all but dead with the horrors of this ordeal. He could not really mean to leave him there to die; some pity would undoubtedly enter a heart which had at one time been that of an ordinary humane citizen."Oh! I have not come to release you," said de Malincourt, still in the same ribald tone he had adopted from the first. "I only returned to repeat the little concert which I am sure will break the monotony of your confinement."At last Carlisle felt he really was going mad, as once again Suzanne's singing rang through the dark cavern. Yesterday this torture appeared horrible enough, but to-day it was unendurable. The mocking words stabbed him like a knife, he quivered beneath them as one who is butchered in cold blood, groaning aloud as he prayed to God to grant him the boon of death.Twice, Monsieur de Malincourt repeated the record, and the sound of his daughter's song and recitation fired his own mad brain, increasing the hideous enjoyment he felt at the diabolical success of his plan."Perhaps to-morrow," he said through the tube, "my little one will sing to deaf ears. Her voice shall only be silenced when yours can speak no more. Then her death will be avenged, and I shall break the record as lightly as you sought to break my heart. Au revoir, my friend. Prepare to meet a judge who avenges the blood of the innocent with even greater torment than the hand of man, which is powerless after death. You can escape from my dungeon when your spirit is drawn from the vile body it inhabits, but your soul in turn must find an endless hell, and it is of that I shall think when your bones crumble to dust."Carlisle was almost too weak to take in these last cruel sentences, for he could not tell if they really came from Réné de Malincourt's lips, or if they were part of the terrible dreams and hallucinations which harrassed his solitude. If only he could have had a drop of water to moisten his parched tongue, the lack of food was nothing compared to the growing thirst. The darkness, too, was like a pall, strangling the breath which came in short painful gasps, racking every nerve, making him feel as if unseen hands stifled him with a gag. Now and again he mustered strength to rush up and down the dungeon, and, since he could not see the walls, he came into violent contact with them, sometimes stunning himself, and thus obtaining a merciful interval of oblivion.Monsieur de Malincourt did not leave the castle immediately, but sat about among the ruins like some evil spirit, gloating over his dastardly deed. Suddenly, as he leant against an ivy-covered wall, something strange and uncanny in the atmosphere filled him with a sense of nervous dread. He had never really believed in the presence of ghosts, for he was not a superstitious man, but now he felt sure an unseen visitant approached him. He rose to his feet, and ran like one pursued to the distant road."I saw nothing," he muttered, with chattering teeth, "yet something cold breathed upon my forehead. Perhaps I am overtired, for it is extraordinary the amount of trouble I took to make my revenge a complete success. If it had been less well arranged, I should not have felt the same keen pleasure in Carlisle's lingering death. Only a great mind could have conceived a means by which Suzanne's voice added to the misery of his last hours."Réné did not look back, as he hurried away down the road. The castle, which, a few minutes since, had appeared like a monument of victory, for the first time frightened him a little."When I return to-morrow," he said, "I will repeat my task as quickly as possible, speaking to Carlisle and regaling him with music, but I will not loiter among the ruins. Perhaps the peasants are right, and the ghosts of my ancestors haunt the place even in broad daylight."He little thought that at that very moment, the earthbound spirit of his daughter reached the spot she had loved in life."Why, Velvein, you have brought me to the old chàteau of Sainte Bruyère," he said, as she looked rapturously upon the crumbling walls over which the creepers grew luxuriantly. "You said you would show me yet another sorrow, but there is nothing sad in this quiet place. I should like to stay here and rest a little, for all the aching hearts into which I have looked seem to have left a mark upon my own. This place reminds me of any childhood; surely you brought me here that I might feel glad?""We must wait until we are wanted," replied Velvein. "Can you feel the influence of past ages hovering over this ancient building? The thoughts of those who lived here linger in the atmosphere for centuries."Suzanne, who since her visit to the gulf had kept very close to Velvein's side, now strayed away among the familiar ruins."In life," she said, "this meant nothing to me, it was just a place where we picnicked and played games. Now I see that every brick and stone holds a history.""Yes," replied Velvein, "though you have been with me so long you have not yet grasped the magnitude of this spiritual world of which you are part. It really penetrates everything which mortals breathe and touch, passing in and out of human dwelling places and magnetising the air. If people on earth would put more of their personal being into the world of spirit, the communion would grow, and the division be bridged over. The universe really contains various forms of existence, which mortal children are not competent so much as to perceive. They have not the faintest notion of what is passing all around them, any more than the worm in the flower pot on a London balcony has of the city's life."Suzanne smiled as she listened, for this peaceful scene helped her to forget the trials she had witnessed under Velvein's guidance."I believe you mean," she replied, "that I was the worm in the flower pot. Of course you are right, I was absolutely blind to everything spiritual.""Many on earth shrink from unseen mysteries," said Velvein, "because they imagine a spirit will have no form at all, and will be merely like a breath of air, or, as Dante thought, like a flame. But it never strikes them that in Bible stories, spirits were recognised by those to whom they appeared, which ought to show that each has an astral body much like his earthly one, only this purified frame can more perfectly express the soul, seen with the insight of love. Even those who are destined to fly instantly over the gulf and are ripe for paradise, sometimes linger near their dear ones, just as mourners cling with aching hearts to fond old memories. Then gradually the released soul becomes more and more absorbed in the beatific vision and drifts away to the higher atmosphere, the light you could not reach. Soon I will tell you why I have brought you to this apparently empty ruin. There is a sufferer here whom you cannot help as yet. The time will arrive when his body is practically dead and then his spirit will come in touch with the wider world. At that moment I shall be permitted to bring him into contact with you. He shall feel you bending over him, and your souls will rush together, if only for a brief period of union. At present he may not be granted the larger liberty of death, for I cannot yet see whether the world will call him back, it is not given to me to know."Suzanne felt a deep interest in the unknown soul of whom her guide spoke."Can I help him as I did the soldier on the battlefield?" she asked with sudden eagerness. "Why is he in this desolate spot, surely it is not the place for a dying man? No human help will reach him here. He will be even more lonely than the wounded warriors; at least they were surrounded with fellow sufferers."Velvein wore a sorrowful air. When he came into the presence of sin he always seemed to droop as if the contamination of earth robbed him of that glorious strength which filled his being when lie rose heavenwards."It matters little where people die," he replied. "It is the state of the character at the moment of death which means so much. Each experience is different on arriving beyond, for the Church Invisible is full of work, and finds much employment in the intermediate life. You are gradually being given quickening powers of activity and usefulness. You still retain your impressions of earth life. Some memories make all the sunshine of the soul, while others are like black poisonous shadows eating out the heart. Just as we swooped down on this ruin, a black monster turned away, terrified at our coming. I recognised him in a moment, but you did not know who he was."Suzanne looked round with searching eyes."I thought you did not notice him," she replied, "and that I saw the loathsome creature because of my earthbound state. It was a devil resting here, planning fresh evil with which to ravage the earth. He made me think of the dark figures who walked at night in the streets; we saw them on that sad evening when we found Julia Dale, only to lose her again. I wish people knew for certain that life does not cease at death, but expands. The certainty would come like an electric thrill, making them conscious of oneness with those who have gone. They would bear their sorrows so much better if they had a larger life to look forward to, but many who say, 'I believe in the resurrection of the dead,' are really unconvinced and full of doubt.""There are some saints in life," said Velvein, "whose faith never alters, however violently they come in contact with sceptics. I know cases of men and women who have been snatched from the jaws of death. Rising from their sick beds they lead an absolutely new and almost perfect life, the outcome of brief contact with the spiritual world, when they were practically dead. The body revives, yet all the time the spirit is half over the border and can never be wholly of earth again. Their fellows call it a wonderful conversion, marvelling at the transformation, but there is really nothing extraordinary in the altered life. The dying man who lies in this ruin, is not yet fit to attempt his flight across the gulf, and a merciful Providence may give you power to hold him back, even though he has passed through all the agonies of death. When night falls he will no longer speak or move, you will hardly see that he is breathing. Then I will leave you alone to watch over him; for the first time since your own death you will be parted from me for a season. Have no fear, for I shall return when I have obeyed my orders."Suzanne felt too happy to rebel against this man-date."I like being here," she said, "it is so still after all the misery I witnessed as we came through noisy Paris, and visited the homes of poverty and sin. The crimes of that great city seem to be driving out all the good spirits who would willingly help. Religion is trodden under foot. In the old days I thought that Paris was almost a little heaven. Here I can feel the warm rays of the sun and forget the whole earth is groaning aloud in the throes of unrecognised sorrow. Every heart has its own secret and each seems bitterer than the last."As the day wore on, Hugh Carlisle drew nearer and nearer his end. There were times when he raved up and down his cell, thinking that physical strength would never surrender to the longed-for death. He had no idea of time, night and day were the same to him, buried from all light in the unfathomable gloom. At least he prayed he might be reunited to the one he had lost in life, and whose memory was passionately dear to him in death. Hour after hour he repeated the same supplication: "If it be possible, oh, God! give me Suzanne."Twilight fell upon the earth, and now Velvein took his young companion to the great iron-clamped door, locked against mortals, but which held no meaning for disembodied spirits."Come," he said, "draw near to Hugh Carlisle, and see the parted lips on which you pressed your last kiss. He needs you now as he never did before. Whisper comfort in his ear; let him know that he is in direct communion with you. Spiritualise his whole being. Have no fear, for other angels are with you, and you will be guarded during my absence from any harm."At the name of Hugh Carlisle, a thrill of deep emotion brought Suzanne into closer contact with the world she had left. Once again she was in touch with the old burning memories. She wondered why she could not find him when first Velvein allowed her to return to her grieving parents. Afterwards she had been permitted to soothe the sorrows of mere strangers while he yearned for her. Now she knew that all the help she could give had been treasured up for this supreme moment. She forgot everything but her desire to aid the soul bound to her by ties of earthly love."The two lives are nearer than I thought," she whispered to Velvein. "How ignorant I was! Must you really leave me? Can't you stay and watch? He will need all the holy influences we can summon to lighten his darkness.""You ask an impossibility," replied Velvein, drawing her to the prostrate body on the ground. "See how wasted he is; he can no longer move or speak, and his breath is so faint many would think he had already passed over the border. Do your best for him, Suzanne. When I return I shall hope to see a smile on those parched and agonised lips. No work is given you beyond your power."As Velvein whispered the words, he drifted upwards through the gloom, leaving his pupil at her post. The man on the ground stirred slightly, now conscious that the thing he longed for had really happened. His soul was filled with the light of love; his prayer had been answered, and the one he sought mingled her spirit with his own."Réné de Malincourt, I bless you," he murmured You have given her back to me, it is Suzanne!"CHAPTER XWHEN Monsieur de Malincourt left his English home, Philippa was conscious of a sense of relief. The house seemed strangely peaceful without his restless presence, and she tried to persuade herself it was well he had gone away to seek forgetfulness in the gaieties of Paris.For the first time since Suzanne's death Philippa had a night of unbroken rest. Only in the morning, just before Martha called her, she woke with a start, seized by a dreadful presentiment.All her husband's wild sayings flashed through her mind, she fancied she could hear him breathing aloud his threats and curses against Hugh Carlisle. How strangely his attitude had changed since he dwelt with apparent pleasure on the thought of revenge!She told herself that he only talked wildly when the sorrow was fresh upon him, he had never meant a word of those dark sayings which distressed her at the time. It was not fair to judge a man so bowed down with grief, when in the bitterness of his heart he had even cursed God. She tried to distract her thoughts with the usual occupations of the morning. There were letters to be written, papers to be read, and household duties were still clear to the soul of Madame de Malincourt, for they helped her to forget the gnawing care ever present in her heart. Yet every now and again the same intuition returned, a feeling that all was not well with her husband. She pictured him with that wild flash in his eyes as he prayed that Hugh Carlisle would not recover, lest he, Suzanne's father, might avenge her death by shedding a libertine's blood. She knew he had sworn over the body of their child to take Hugh Carlisle's life, and now these two men were travelling alone together, apparently on terms of close friendship.She marvelled that her suspicions had not been roused before. They seemed to have slumbered until some voice quite outside herself spoke to her inner consciousness of approaching tragedy. In vain she sought to shake off a nameless dread, and, unable to bear her gloomy thoughts in silence, she confided something of her fear to Martha."I feel terribly uneasy about my husband," she said. Did you notice how cheerful he appeared when he drove away with Mr. Carlisle? I do not believe an outward show of good spirits can really help people who suffer as we do. It is not likely that your master has forgotten his recent grief, and I reproach myself for not travelling with him on this apparently meaningless journey. More than once I have felt my brain totter; I was on the verge of losing my reason. Have you ever noticed, Martha, that queer light in monsieur's eyes, which I, for one, never saw there before?"Martha was always reserved, but her devotion to Madame de Malincourt was so pronounced, that she tried to shake off an habitual stiffness which made her unpopular with other people."We have all noticed a very great change in the master," she acknowledged. "His gaiety seems put on to hide depression. A few days ago I came into his study thinking he was out, instead he was asleep in the arm-chair. For a moment his white face frightened me, and I was surprised he did not wake, for the door slammed after me as the window was open and made a draught. Instead his head fell forward and lie muttered strangely in his sleep.""Can you remember what he said?" asked Madame de Malincourt, for she knew well that terrible dreams haunted him at night, dreams he would describe to her in the morning, generally dealing with murder or death.Martha fingered her apron nervously as she tried to remember the words."He said the door of a tomb had closed, that his victim was buried alive, and then he smiled in a way which froze my blood. I thought, perhaps, I ought to wake him, but I had not the courage. I just left the room quickly, and tried to forget the look on his face."Philippa started involuntarily, for she, too, had heard these very same words on her husband's lips, the night before he left for Paris. She woke him, and to her surprise he declared that for once he had been enjoying a very pleasant dream.She told him he had been talking of a tomb, but he laughed off the remark, saying he was back at Sainte Bruyère, and that he and Suzanne had been exploring the old dungeon together."Martha," she said, making a quick resolve, "I shall go to Paris to-morrow. You can pack my things, and come with me if you like. I daresay a change will do you good after your own bereavement. We will not tell monsieur, but just arrive unexpectedly at his hotel. I am sure it is not right for him to be alone with Mr. Carlisle, whose presence must always remind him of that dreadful night when the light of our eyes went out."Martha was thoroughly surprised at her mistress's proposition. She knew Madame de Malincourt hated going abroad, that she only desired solitude, and had mentioned more than once the lonely house helped her to bear her sorrow. The presence of people, or the fact of having to go out, always plunged her into deeper depression. Now this sudden change was utterly incomprehensible to methodical Martha."I do not think you are strong enough, madam, to undertake the journey," she said. "Why, even a short walk tires you terribly, and the rush and bustle of foreign travel will bring on your severe headaches without a doubt."Madame de Malincourt was suffering from such feverish anxiety, that all thought of her own ill-health vanished miraculously."I know there is something wrong, Martha," she replied in a tone of conviction. "You may ask me how I know, but I cannot answer. It is a mysterious warning which came to me early this morning, perhaps merely the result of nerves. My place is certainly beside my husband, for lately he has seemed more like a child than a man. I cannot expect Mr. Carlisle to understand him, and I should never forgive myself if he did something rash which I might have prevented."Martha had never seen her mistress in quite such a strange mood. She felt sorry she mentioned that Monsieur de Malincourt talked in his sleep while dozing in the daytime, since, after all, indigestion might easily account for the lugubrious mutterings she had overheard."You do not think the master would injure himself?" she asked, in a tone which held genuine concern.Philippa shook her head, not daring to say what was really in her mind. Instead, she began to write a list of the things she required Martha to pack, quite determined not to tell Réné of her proposed visit.That evening Martha hoped against hope that Madame de Malincourt would change her mind. She had often travelled abroad with her mistress before, but cordially disliked foreign customs."I am afraid there is no getting out of it this time," she told her fellow servants. "I am not sure the master will be best pleased when we pay our surprise visit. It would have been much better to leave him alone until he returns to a more natural frame of mind."Martha's opinion was not shared by the rest of the household. Those who had daily watched Monsieur de Malincourt's extraordinary behaviour, declared his wife had come to a very wise decision."I've thought for a long time that he is going off his head," said the footman who valeted Monsieur de Malincourt. "He is so absent-minded at times, that he puts on all the wrong clothes, and would appear looking a fine guy if I did not point out his mistakes. He should have taken me on his journey, for I am sure he needed someone to see after him."Certainly Martha and Madame de Malincourt looked a sad couple as they travelled to the gay city. Martha wore crape for her mother, and madame was dressed very like a widow, for Monsieur de Malincourt disliked the English custom of discarding the deep mourning still dear to the heart of the foreigner. Philippa did not regret her decision, for the letters received from Paris were written in such a strangely elated mood, she felt sure her husband was becoming light-headed."Really, I pity poor Mr. Carlisle," she said to Martha, who still wore an injured expression and wished herself home again. "He must find my husband a very trying companion, for he either becomes so depressed that his conversation quite frightens one, or grows as excited as a school boy. Mr. Carlisle is hardly likely to be in the mood to enjoy extremes. He is trying to face the world bravely, but I know how difficult he finds the task. From a little note he wrote me on the night of their arrival I am quite sure the pleasures of Paris cannot cheer him; they will both be acting all the time. It is terrible, isn't it, to think of two men going about to places of amusement, laughing and feasting, when all the time the heart is full of tears? Women are differently constituted, they have to fight out their grief alone, they cannot make a pretence of enjoying what is so utterly hollow and unsatisfying."It was the day after Réné had locked his victim in the awful darkness of the Sainte Bruyère dungeon, when, on his return to the hotel, he found he was no longer alone.Madame de Malincourt had engaged a sitting room, and throwing back her heavy veil she greeted him with a wintry smile."I felt anxious about you," she said, as he hurriedly entered the room, having just heard from the manager of madame's arrival. "Your letters were so vague, you said nothing about your health, and suddenly I felt bound to come to you, just as if you had sent me a call across the water. I will not interfere with your amusements, if you and Mr. Carlisle are really having the pleasant time you described when last you wrote. It didn't ring true or I should have remained quietly at home. I felt you were asking me to credit something you did not believe yourself."Réné took her hands in a feverish clasp and gazed at her with wildly distended eyes, in which there gleamed a light she could not understand."You were wrong," he said, "for I have had the most glorious tune of my life. Heaven! how I have enjoyed the last two days, so full of sweetness that I would not spare one moment of recollection! You shake your head, you think I am talking wildly, it is truth, Philippa. I can laugh at the world, I can snap my fingers in the face of grief, it has all fallen away from me and I am free."He spoke so loudly that Martha in the adjoining room could hear the strange utterances."I believe they were right at home," she thought. Monsieur de Malincourt is losing his senses, he talks like a mad-man. I will push the door open so that my mistress can call me if she is afraid."Philippa drew him down to the sofa keeping her hand firmly on his wrist, feeling as she did so the quickly beating pulse."Where is Hugh Carlisle?" she asked, looking him straight in the eyes with an expression of searching enquiry."You ask too much," he replied. "I cannot tell you his movements, for he found me too erratic, and, as I wrote you, left for Morocco. Perhaps you missed that last letter of mine, but I certainly do not regret his absence at all. You know quite well I hated him, though I pretended to be his friend. Let us discuss something more pleasant, my dear, for neither you nor I need ever see our child's betrayer again."At the word "betrayer," Madame de Malincourt started, surely this was a strange way of alluding to a so-called friend. She stirred uneasily, suddenly feeling as if the heat of the room stifled her. She rose and opened the window, then drawing a deep breath of fresh air returned to Réné's side."How have you amused yourself?" she asked. "Surely you found it dull being here alone. When you went away you spoke in such glowing terms of Hugh Carlisle, but now you have turned against him, perhaps you are annoyed he left you. Come! confess, you missed him a little after all!"Philippa's voice was quite unnatural, she felt as if she were acting a part. She was no longer in touch with the husband who had so entirely filled her life in old days, something in his manner made him like a stranger. He laughed a little as she questioned him."Time has not hung heavily on my hands," he declared, and even as she watched the familiar shrug of the shoulders, the gesture appeared strangely different. There was a cynicism in his every word and movement which momen-tarily made her believe he was suffering from some disease of the brain. "The last two days, if you wish to know, have been spent far away from the racket of the city. I wanted a more soothing atmosphere, so I travelled to my old home and spent some lonely, but happy, hours in the dear old ruin at Sainte Bruyère. The perfect peace of the place brought an exquisite sense of boy, never since my childhood have I felt so light-hearted.""But what did you do there, all alone?" she queried, still watching that strange glint in his eyes which brightened as he spoke of the château. "It always seemed such a desolate spot to me, so suggestive of decay and death. Even on the brightest day I could never see the beauty which filled you and our child with such enthusiasm. It is so horribly lonely, and the last time I picnicked there the country-side was suffering from a plague of rats. I was terrified out of my life, and never went back again after seeing a crowd of them disappear down into the dungeon.""The dungeon," muttered Monsieur de Malincourt, "holds something better now than starving rats. Do you know, Philippa, it contains hidden treasures, and the thing which lies there will make me everlastingly rich, I mean rich in the best sense of the word. One can store in the soul a wealth of memory which brings gladness to the years. To gain a desire is sometimes better than winning a fortune.""Poor fellow!" she thought. "He is certainly wandering now, for what could he find in that dreadful old place where men starved to death in the days when mercy towards an enemy was unknown?""You look as if you did not believe me," continued Réné, with increased excitement. "Perhaps I can hardly expect you to credit that a locked-up dungeon could hold a panacea for all ills. I want you to share my triumph and relief, but I do not think I shall tell you just yet, some day I will reveal the secret that we may rejoice together."Madame de Malincourt felt sure he had drifted into the realms of fancy and longed to probe his weird imagination."You know I love a secret," she whispered, "and you have never shut me from your confidence before. Tell me, Réné, what has soothed your grief and brought you this glorious sense of consolation? I feel it is rather hard to be left out in the cold."Her voice took a coaxing tone, her arms were round him, holding him fast. She had drawn his head upon her shoulder, and could feel as she clasped him the strange tremors which ran through his body."But you do not like me to speak of Suzanne," he replied, in a breathless undertone. "Whenever I mention her name I see you shudder. Sometimes that shudder of yours has frozen the words on my lips, and I dare not name our child in your presence. I thought you no longer loved me, Philippa, that was why I came away alone. Of course, I did not really care about Carlisle's company, he was always in my eyes as some low debased brute, who tracked down its prey in deadly intent. I shall never believe he meant well by our child. Does a man who really loves injure the loved one willingly? He must have known what the world would say when he stole her away on that dark night of death. He pretended to mourn with us to save his own reputation, but Suzanne was nothing to him but a light butterfly whose wings he longed to crush. Now he has gone away to a place from which he may never return. Let us hope he will meet with some disaster in Morocco. Heaven always punishes those who injure the innocent."Philippa listened with increasing fear to her husband's cruel words."Oh! Réné," she said, "how you do misjudge that un-
 fortunate man! If you feel like this, I wonder you asked him to travel with you and entertained him at our house. It seems so terribly double-faced to smile at any one openly, and abuse him behind his back. I could never do that, I must always show my feelings, and in my heart I have forgiven Hugh Carlisle, because I know his suffering was nearly as deep as our own. You remember I had an interview with him one day quite alone, then he gave me a little insight into his soul. He broke down completely when speaking of Suzanne, she was the only thing he had ever really loved on earth. There was no wickedness in their hearts, no sin on their souls, and heaven knows he paid severely enough for an indiscretion. I suppose you drove him away by letting him see what you really felt. No wonder you parted company so soon, you were indeed a badly assorted couple.""No," replied Réné, shaking his head, "we were the warmest of comrades, for outwardly he thought I had forgiven. That was the thrilling part of it all, the way I made him trust me, so that he never suspected the seething hatred beneath my smile. You ask me to tell you the secret of the dungeon, and the treasure that dark cavern holds. It contains the voice of our child, which sings, and laughs and speaks while I sit by the door and listen. If you care to come with me, you shall hear it for yourself. Won't that give you pleasure, to enjoy again the singing of Suzanne?"Now Philippa knew that her fears were confirmed, and trembled to think she had left her husband alone in this serious mental condition."Dearest," she said, "you need a long rest. That poor tired head of yours can recall the loved voice in the quiet of your room, instead of travelling to Sainte Bruyère to listen for it in a dingy ruin. You look tired to death, and I want to persuade you to go to bed. Martha and I will soon nurse you back to health."Réné was like a child in her hands, though he persisted that whatever remedies they prescribed to-night, he must go to the château on the following morning, that Suzanne might sing to him again.Madame made a quick sign to Martha as she entered the room in answer to a summons."Hurry downstairs," she whispered, "and tell the manager to send for the best doctor he knows. Monsieur de Malincourt is very unwell, and if you can find out the name of a good mental specialist, let him come for choice."Réné continued to talk of the dungeon, and as he lay back on his pillows, he laughed at intervals in a strangely satisfied way which terrified his wife. His air of happiness was so uncanny that it seemed more dreadful than his recent grief, and shame for his unfortunate condition made her glad Hugh Carlisle was not there to see. Certainly she felt a little hurt that her husband's companion had not let her know of his change of plans."One cannot wonder," she thought, "that poor Réné got on his nerves, for he would not know this unnatural elation was the result of a mind temporarily unbalanced. Perhaps Mr. Carlisle left him thoroughly disgusted by such an outward show of heartlessness, which would especially pain him under the circumstances."When Dr. Giraudet came he was inclined to take a serious view of the case, but could give no definite report till the following day."Your husband is certainly suffering from delusions," he told Philippa, "but they may be the result of his feverish condition. It is difficult to judge of such cases when the patient is a stranger. Have you seen him like this before? Has he ever suffered in the past from brain fever?"Madame de Malincourt explained that her husband was always rather erratic, very high-spirited or extremely de-pressed, according to the mood of the moment. He was subject to high temperature if ever he caught the slightest chill, and since his bereavement he had become so emaciated, it seemed there could be no physical stamina to resist an illness."I will send him a soothing draught, and call in the morning," said the doctor, anxious not to alarm his patient's wife unnecessarily. Someone should sit up with him, and if you would like a nurse, I can send you one within an hour."Madame replied they had an old and trusted servant at the hotel, and that she and Martha would take it in turns to watch by the bedside. If in the morning a professional attendant should be needed, of course, they would let him know immediately.Réné seemed rather amused at all the fuss they were making over him."I have only a slight headache, and rather a pleasant sense of fatigue," he declared as he took the medicine from Philippa's trembling hand. "It was quite absurd to send for a doctor, and whatever he says, I shall get up to-morrow and go to Sainte Bruyère, for I made a vow to return, and if, sometimes, I break my word to others, I never lie to myself. You may come with me if you please, and then you will see if the voice of Suzanne exists only in my imagination. You believe I am mad, and it fills me with inward amusement. Perhaps that stuff you have just given me will help me to sleep and keep away the dreams which so often break my rest. If so, I shall not grudge paying the doctor's bill, although he is rather mistaken if he expects to find me here to-morrow morning."Madame de Malincourt did not argue the point, but she noticed his manner was less excitable, and that he seemed inclined to doze."Martha;" she said, "you look tired to death after our journey. I am wide awake, and could not sleep a wink if I tried. Go to bed now, and I will sit up for the first half of the night. When I begin to feel tired I will come and call you. If we halve the hours of watching they will not seem so long."Martha gladly retired to rest, for the strain of a bad sea-crossing had made her quite unfit to watch by a sick bed. She assured her mistress that, after a few hours sleep, she would be quite able to take her place in Monsieur de Malincourt's room, only, for the moment, she could not get rid of the feeling she was still in the ship's cabin, being rocked up and down to her infinite discomfort.As Madame de Malincourt sat by her husband, she was a prey to many fears. She told herself that in the future she must take the man's place, and practically become the head of their establishment. Réné was unfit to rule his own life, and conduct the business matters, which had made him in the past an excellent guardian of her fortune. As she watched the wasted face on the pillow, she thought with a shudder all the humanity had left those once kindly features. The mouth had a thoroughly bad expression, there was something depraved in the whole countenance. It was as if a stamp of evil had been placed upon it by an unseen hand, changing what was once pleasing into a hideous mask of deformity. He was such a travesty of his former self, she could not bear to look on the wreck of his manhood."It isn't merely grief," she thought, "which has eaten into his brain. Hatred for a fellow creature has helped on the ruin. If he could only have forgiven, he might have kept his hold upon reason. How blind I was to let him come away with Hugh Carlisle! Perhaps, seeing that man so constantly worked harm, and just sent the quivering intellect over the borderland to madness."She did not doubt that his distraught brain had listened to the voice of Suzanne. She knew people, whose minds had given way, heard many strange sounds which drove them to frenzy. Certainly Providence had been merciful in giving him happy delusions, a phase which Dr. Giraudet said was very rare.Presently Réné talked in his sleep, and his words continued to puzzle Philippa. He mentioned the dungeon more than once, always in a tone of rapturous pleasure."To-morrow," he murmured, "my voice and Suzanne's shall pierce those thick walls again, but no ear may hear us, we shall talk, perhaps, to the dead. The cry of the owl in the ruined tower or the wailing of the wind will never reach that tomb—only my voice and Suzanne's, only Suzanne's and mine."Not until early daylight streamed into the room did Philippa, exhausted by her long watch, creep to Martha's side and rouse the sleeping figure."I must lie down now," she said, "for if your master should want anything, I am almost too tired to know what I am doing. Of course you can call me if necessary, but I do not think there will be any reason. The doctor's draught has given him a splendid night, and I am hoping, when he wakes, he will be quite different."Martha hurriedly put on her clothes, and Madame de Malincourt soon lost all memory of her sorrow as she sank into heavy slumber.The sun was up, streaming into her room, when gradually her now rested senses escaped from an almost trance-like sleep. Slowly she came back to life, not remembering where she was, or the disturbing events of the previous evening. She was just in that pleasant half-waking stage when the mind hovers between dreamland and reality. She thought someone bent over her whose presence was peculiarly soothing, she could almost have sworn that two living hands pressed upon her temples, instilling a thought into her dazed and tired brain."Go to Sainte Bruyère," said a voice in her ear. "Don't wait another moment, go there immediately, you are wanted.""Who said' you are wanted'?" murmured Madame de Malincourt, as she sat up and blinked her eyes.She could hardly believe, as she looked round, that she was really alone in the room. There was nothing terrifying in the presence she had felt at her side, only the words ringing in her head disturbed her, they were so forcible and insistent."Strange," she murmured, "that is the second time I have had a strong intuition at the moment of waking. I felt bound to come to Paris, and Réné's illness has proved the warning was correct. Had I disregarded it, I could never have forgiven myself. Now this same voice has spoken to me again, yet what good can I do at the old ruin? My place is here beside my husband, Sainte Bruyère must wait."CHAPTER XISOFTLY Madame de Malincourt stole to her husband's room. Hearing no sound she felt sure she would find him asleep. She turned the handle as quietly as possible, but found to her surprise that the door was locked."Martha!" she cried, "let me in, why have you fastened the door?"As no reply reached her listening ears a sense of terror possessed her, an intuition that something dreadful had happened.She rushed back to her room and rang the bell frantically. The maid who answered the summons only added to her anxiety."I suppose," she said, in answer to Madame de Malincourt's enquiries, "that Monsieur locked the door before leaving the room. I saw him go downstairs fully dressed about an hour ago. Possibly he has some valuables and did not care to leave the door open.""But have you seen nothing of my maid?" asked the frightened woman, alarmed by Martha's apparent neglect of duty. Evidently the femme de chambre
 knew nothing of Martha's movements, and while Madame de Malincourt hastily dressed, she begged that the manager should come to her at once.She had seized a few clothes and straightened her hair by the time the proprietor of the hotel, who guessed something was wrong, hurried up in answer to her summons."Madame seems in some distress," he said with a low bow and look of sympathy. "Am I to understand that her maid has mysteriously disappeared? She did not go out with Monsieur de Malincourt who left the hotel early. He told us not to mention his absence, but his manner was so strange, I decided to acquaint Madame when she came down."Philippa's fears increased, she explained her husband was certainly ill, and on the verge of brain fever. The doctor had specially ordered the patient to stay in bed until he saw him again, and unless something had happened to Martha, she would never have allowed him to get up. The door of the room must be instantly forced, since it was locked against them.The proprietor sent at once for his master-key, and on entering the room a strange sight met their eyes. Martha with a gag over her mouth, was tightly bound to a chair, the chair in its turn being fastened to the bed post. She was in a half fainting condition, and when released could not speak for some moments. Then she told a strange story:"Monsieur," she said, "woke suddenly and sprang from his bed in order to dress." He told her to leave the room, saying she must not delay him as he had an appointment at Sainte Bruyère. He commanded her, in a peremptory tone, not to mention this fact to her mistress. When she tried to persuade him to go quietly back to bed, he appeared to grow suspicious and sprang upon her without warning. She thought until that moment she was a strong woman, but though Monsieur appeared so thin, his muscles were like iron and he seemed possessed of almost supernatural strength. Quickly he overpowered her, forcing a handkerchief into her mouth and pinioning her down despite her struggles. She knew from the cruel way he handled her that she was in the grip of a madman. She was only thankful lie did not attempt her life, and sat shivering while he dressed himself, wondering how long she would remain in that attitude of discomfort. Her heart sank as she saw him take the key, realising he was about to lock her in. He shook his fist at her as he reached the door, muttering again, and declaring he did not wish to be followed into the country!Philippa instantly decided what to do. She asked the manager to telephone at once for Dr. Giraudet and order her a motor, that together they might go to the ruins and find her husband.Martha, who was quite overcome, was in a state of collapse bordering on hysteria. Philippa tried to console her as she finished dressing, almost too agitated herself to enter into Martha's troubles."Of course you have had a severe shock. I would not have left you alone with Monsieur had I dreamt he would become violent. You shall see the doctor, and he will prescribe for your nerves. In the meantime go to bed and keep quiet. When I return, I will have suitable attendants to prevent such a catastrophe occurring again."Martha tried to pull herself together, impressed by Philippa's courage."You are very brave, Madame," she said, "but would it not be wiser to send some strong men to find your husband, and stay here quietly yourself? It was terrible to see him in his frenzy! If he were suddenly to turn against you, he might do you some mortal injury. It really seems as though your troubles would never end. I suppose they will have to put the master away; that will be almost as bad as another bereavement."Philippa paid little heed to the words, she was too strung up to grieve, and felt more like a woman in a dream just watching to see what would happen next. All her movements were mechanical, and, when the doctor arrived, she explained the situation without a tremor in her voice. Martha aided the story with a graphic description of her own unpleasant experience, the recital of which showed the medical man that his worst fears had been realised."Last night," he said to Madame de Malincourt, "I thought your husband's brain was hovering in the balance, and might readjust itself after a long rest. I regret I did not insist upon your having a trained attendant, but I hardly expected the malady to increase with such rapid strides. If he spoke so much of his old home, telling two people he was going to Sainte Bruyère, we shall probably find him there unless he has come to some harm on the way. First, I should like to telephone his description to the railway authorities and the police. Then I must see that our chauffeur is a strong man, ready to lend a hand in the case of emergency. Madame may be of great use if she has the courage to come."He looked enquiringly at Réné's wife, summing her up in one keen, penetrating glance."She has plenty of grit in her and sound common sense," he thought. "She is not a woman to lose her head, and may have some influence over her husband even in his advanced stage of madness."Philippa had no intention of remaining behind; with a last word of consolation to Martha, she hurried downstairs with Dr. Giraudet. He spoke confidentially to the chauffeur, explaining their mission. The man was a strong, somewhat rough-looking fellow, and gladly welcomed the chance of making a little extra money, should help be required when they reached their destination."I was a wrestler at one time, Monsieur," he said. "If you want a pair of strong arms, mine will be at your service."They started off at full speed, for the road to Sainte Bruyére was familiar to the driver. There was excitement in this tour which made it different from an ordinary excursion. These people, he knew, were hunting a madman who had escaped from the hotel after using violence, and might cause more trouble before they landed him in safety.From Martha's account, Monsieur de Malincourt must have caught the early train, and by now would have reached the old ruined château, which apparently held for him a strange fascination. As they neared Sainte Bruyère, Madame de Malincourt caught sight of the farmer who lived on their property. She signed to the driver to stop, and asked the man if he had seen anything of her husband. From his beaming face and cheerful nodding head, she at once saw he knew nothing of her sorrow."Monsieur was here three days ago," he said, "and borrowed my ladder to inspect the walls. Afterwards he deigned to pay my wife a visit. We were glad to hear that you and Mademoiselle were both in such good health. He promised next time he came to France he would bring her to see us again."As he spoke the farmer noticed that Madame de Malincourt was in deep mourning. With a flash of recollection he remembered his wife's words, wondering if after all she had been right.Philippa did not wait to explain, she could not bring herself to tell him what had really occurred, though she felt he read in her face something of the truth. Suddenly his smile died away, he looked confused as he shuffled his feet and lowered his eyes."As you know this man," said the doctor in a whisper, "why not ask him to accompany us? He looks a sensible fellow and may be useful."Philippa leaned forward again and beckoned the farmer nearer."We are going to the ruins," she said, "to find my husband. He is not at all well, in fact he is suffering from some brain trouble, and we are afraid he may injure himself or others. Will you come with us? We shall be glad of your help."Springing up beside the chauffeur, the burly farmer, eager to do Madame a service, readily consented to join the search party. As they drove on, the two men talked in low voices, while Madame and the doctor sat in stony silence, gazing at the picturesque ruin which a turn in the road brought in sight."I shall go straight to the dungeon," she said, as they drew up by a clump of trees on the opposite side of the road. "He told me last night it held some hidden treasure, it is there he thinks he hears our daughter's voice. You and the men might follow me at a short distance, I am sure Réné would never do me any harm, he only attacked Martha because lie wanted to get out."Philippa was no longer a prey to fear, for remembering the influence which warned her in the morning she was wanted at Sainte Bruyére, she firmly believed she was obeying an angel guide. She felt as if the same unseen figure walked at her side, making her strong. Never before had she lost her sense of the material, under the influence of spiritual protection.It was Velvein who walked by her side, Velvein who had brought her to this spot, where a man lay dying in his living tomb.She passed under the old ruined arch with its heavy cloak of ivy, making her way softly to the grey lichen-covered steps leading to the dungeon door. Then a strange sound caught her ear. Surely it was the voice of Suzanne singing in the distance an old familiar refrain! For a moment she thought her own senses were deserting her. Looking round, she saw her husband leaning against the heavy wall adjoining the iron clamped door, with an elated expression on his face. He, too, listened, as the voice re-echoed in the dark cavern where he said his treasure lay.Seeing his wife, he called to her softly, apparently pleased at her unexpected visit."So you have come to hear our darling sing," he cried. "Listen how she laughs at the devil in the tomb. You and I, Philippa, will soon go to find his bones, and none shall ever say that Réné de Malincourt did not avenge the death of his child. See, if you put your lips to this tube, you can speak to him and taunt him as I have done. This is the third day I have left him in utter darkness to die of hunger and thirst. I spoke just now but received no answer, he has ceased to argue with me or to plead, the shadow of death has doubtless fallen. I have set Suzanne to sing over his dead body, a fitting end for such a villain as Hugh Carlisle."Philippa lost control of herself as she listened. Giving one wild shriek she rushed towards the men who ran to meet her. The sight of the little party apparently staggered Réné Now he leant back against the wall raising his fists to defend himself, realising that Philippa's companions had come to track him down. She rushed to the door in which he had left the rusty key, trying in vain to turn it, for her hands were weak and trembling."My God!" she cried, "Hugh Carlisle is in there if Réné speaks truth. That was his secret. Oh, heavens! what a hideous revenge."The farmer, who knew the dungeon well, quickly assisted her to open the heavy door, swinging it back on its rusty hinges as he had often done when the place was used for storing ice.Dr. Giraudet stayed by Réné, trying to calm him, talking as if he were an old friend, in the soothing voice he used to his patients when frenzy was upon them. Seizing a box of watches the farmer and the chauffeur entered the dungeon with Madame de Malincourt, and there a sight of horror met their eyes. Hugh Carlisle lay stretched on the ground apparently dead, a look of agony on his wasted features. His hands were clasped in an attitude of prayer. There were wounds on his forehead, where the sharp edges of the wall had struck him as he ran blindly to and fro in the darkness. For a moment Philippa stumbled back to the steps in the throes of deadly faintness. Then with a mighty effort at self-control, she pulled herself together, calling to the men to bring him into the light, since even yet they might restore him. As they emerged from this living tomb bearing Réné's victim in their arms, the wild laughter of the maniac greeted their appearance. For a moment the murderer was forgotten as the doctor rushed forward to examine the body they laid on a slab of rock."Is he dead?" whispered Madame de Malincourt, not daring to hope the answer would be "no.""There is just the faintest breath of life left in the body," replied the doctor, "which might revive if we could get restoratives instantly. Loosen his clothes and carry him to the car, you must drive at break-neck speed to the nearest house.""But what can we do with Réné?" asked Philippa, as she watched her husband's apparent delight as he gloated over the ghastly form of the dying man."I should like to shut him in the dungeon and leave him there until we have time to attend to him," said Dr. Giraudet, his anger rising as he thought of de Malincourt's hideous deed. "Perhaps if I tell him he can come quietly with us or stay down there in the dark, he will have sense enough to obey me."Réné heard the words and took them as a joke."Who is your friend, Philippa?" he queried. "Certainly an amusing fellow. I like his looks, I will come with him in the motor and, if they care to bring Carlisle, it matters little to me now. All I asked was to see him dead, and to know that he died well aware I planned this vengeance. I brought the voice of Suzanne from England. I thought I could never bear to hear it again, but as it sang to him, it gave me solace. Let me lean on your arm, Philippa, for now it is all over, I feel weak and tired as a child."They were a strange group as they drove away from the ruins in the bright sunlight of the morning. Philippa kept her arms round her husband as if she would shield him from all ill, while lie sat smiling at the doctor to whom he had taken a peculiar fancy. He did not seem to notice Carlisle's figure stretched across the cushions, for, believing the man dead, all interest in his victim seemed to have vanished. Before they reached the house, they stopped by a stream of water and bathed the livid face, damping the parched lips which had cried aloud so recently in an agony of thirst. The cool rush of air and water brought a change over the marble features, and Dr. Giraudet whispered to Philippa he believed they might save him after all. Quickly they reached the house of the local doctor to which the farmer directed them, some miles from the ruined château, and Hugh Carlisle was carried into the surgery. Fortunately the medical man was at home, and quickly explaining the amazing circumstances, the great physician from Paris consulted with his less experienced brother as to the treatment of this interesting patient."At any rate," said the younger man, "the brute who buried this poor fellow alive will be tried for attempted murder, and get his deserts.""There will be no trial," said Dr. Giraudet. "Monsieur de Malincourt who planned this diabolical outrage must be taken immediately to an asylum. I do not think there is the smallest chance of his recovering reason. If ever I saw a raving maniac, it is the little man sitting outside in the car, holding his wife's hand and laughing as he talks of a fellow creature's sufferings. For the rest of his life, he will probably boast that he killed the man he hated. Perhaps it is as well he should think so, for a happy lunatic saves the doctors and attendants a world of trouble."The heart and pulse of Hugh Carlisle answered faintly to the treatment administered by skilful hands. Gradually his thread of life revived, as on the night of the motor accident, only this time the soul had been nearer eternity, in direct communication with the spirit world."Hugh recognised me; he talked to me," said Suzanne, as she rejoined Velvein in the air. "Now the people of the world have taken him away just as I thought he had come over to us. Isn't it rather cruel of them?"Velvein shook his head."No," he replied, "for his hour is not yet. His body will return to earth, but half his soul will remain with us, he can never be the same again after the rapture of communion with the other world. A great surprise awaits his friends. They will see Hugh Carlisle moving about again in the flesh, but he will be changed. He cannot lose the sweetness of those hours which have transformed him completely, though given back to the world for some purpose which does not concern us. Why, you are trying to return to him, Suzanne. So the ties of the past still fetter you? Come away, my child, let him rise to your level, let him seek your spirit which hourly grows stronger. You must not be sad, for your guardian angel is with you."Suzanne smiled up at Velvein with growing courage."Just for a moment," she confessed, "I wanted to stay at Hugh's side. Those hours of reunion were so sweet, when his spirit lay in my arms and I enfolded him with my wings. But he bound me to earth in the darkness of the dungeon. You, Velvein, can help me towards the light of that shining city beyond the Gulf.""Not yet," said Velvein, "for first I must take you to a house of soulless people, whose twisted brains have tortured the spirit till it died within them. Come with me to the great madhouse where your father will spend the rest of his days. There you shall see a mysterious phase of humanity. Perhaps you will recognise someone whom you met quite early in your spirit career. It is one of life's many tragedies, but it is not the worst sorrow.""The worst sorrow," said Suzanne, "is in the Gulf. Are the mad people down there, too?"Velvein raised his arms and pointed upwards."Those suffering souls are taken to a sphere apart, and judged differently," he said. "Your father was more a criminal when thoughts of revenge first tainted his brain, than when he actually carried them into execution. The devils were with him then. Now he is only a body without a mind, no use to anyone; even the devils have given him up!"CHAPTER XIIJULIA DALE was leaning back on a pile of cushions in a daintily furnished boudoir. A book lay idly in her hands, but instead of reading she watched the clock with rather anxious eyes."I wonder," she thought, "if Betty will come, or whether she will be afraid. She seemed so nervous yesterday, as though she hardly dared speak to me."Since Julia's return from a tour abroad, Betty Brown was the first old acquaintance she had met, one of the theatre girls who happened to be passing as she stepped from a taxi on one of her many shopping expeditions. They had only exchanged a few words, in which Julia pressed Betty to have tea with her the following afternoon. At first the girl absolutely declined, but Julia's stronger will eventually forced a hesitating acceptance."Betty was never shy," she thought. "I wonder why she didn't want to come to-day."The clock struck four, the hour fixed during that hurried conversation on the pavement. Punctuality had always been one of Betty's virtues in the old theatrical days, and simultaneously a maid announced: "Miss Brown."Julia sprang up with a warm smile of welcome. All Betty's nervousness had vanished, she was now the laughing devil-may-care creature who earlier in life often shocked and horrified her quieter friend. Julia remembered on more than one occasion reproving Betty for the wild life she led, offering advice which was only received with mirth and derision."Well, this is jolly!" said the visitor, first glancing round the artistic room, then eyeing the cakes and scones on the tea table with an approving smile. "You have fallen on your feet, Julia. Your man does you well."Julia winced slightly, the coarse words cut her, though she knew they were deserved. She looked away quickly, thinking how Betty would laugh to see she was still capable of blushing."Why did you seem so frightened of me yesterday?" she asked, anxious to change the subject. "I half thought you wouldn't come to-day; you looked quite scared at my suggestion."Betty wriggled herself into a more comfortable position, and placed her muddy boots on a light brocade foot-stool."Well, you see," she explained, "it was my mistake, for I thought things were different. You used to lecture me in the old days, and talk very grandly about morality and all that kind of thing. You fairly took me in, and I believed you were above the ordinary run. When I heard you were living in comfort like this, and I saw you so well dressed, I supposed you were married. I didn't like the idea of your husband, perhaps, ordering me out of the house. I have had a door closed in my face before now, and it isn't pleasant. Anyhow, I made enquiries, and when I found you were just one of us, I couldn't help feeling relieved. Frederick Reece has behaved quite decently to you, for in other cases he was an awful brute. I know several girls he has treated in a way that snakes even my blood boil, but I can forgive him now, seeing you so happy. Of course you are nearer his own class, and I expect he is really fond of you."Julia's eyes expanded slightly as she listened. During her travels abroad she had passed as Mrs. Reece, and to sit and discuss the situation in cold blood filled her with sudden nausea."You must think me a fearful hypocrite," she said, as she poured out the tea with a trembling hand. "There was always a strain of the Puritan in my nature, and when I bullied you about your life, I meant every word of it. You remember the night we were all turned away without our salaries?"Betty nodded, it was difficult to forget those hard times."Rather! I was up to my eyes in debt, nearly starving, and so ill I could be of no use to anyone. I had to go into hospital, but for that I think I should have died."Julia's expression was deeply sympathetic. Lately she had grown so extremely sensitive that the sufferings of others seemed to hurt like her own."Poor Betty!" she murmured. "It was on that dreadful night I threw all my prejudices to the wind, for I was at a loose end when Frederick Reece found me. I did try to fight against temptation, and I hated myself for what I did, but no one can judge until they are in the same boat. It is all very well to hold up your head when you are getting regular pay, however small. That evening my brain seemed to give way, I wasn't myself any more; I became another person driven to desperation by a chain of circumstances. I actually stole some money from Mr. Reece. When he made light of it and forgave me I was like a child in his hands. We went abroad the next day, and I was so entranced by all the wonderful things I saw in that strange new world, I lost all sense of shame. Then gradually I fell in love with him as I have never loved before. No husband could be dearer to me than this one man to whom I have given myself. A wife, of course, would have other interests, but he simply fills my whole world. I count the days to his coming here, for I do not see him very often. His social life takes much of his time, but I know I am always in his thoughts, and he writes me the most beautiful letters. It is such a rest to him to spend some quiet hours with me after all the rushing about, for, of course, he is very popular. I wish, Betty, you had just one lover, who would be faithful to you, even though he couldn't give you his name."There was the ghost of a cynical smile lurking round Betty's lips as she listened."Poor innocent," she thought, "how he has stuffed her up! It is early days to pride herself on this supreme power. I wonder how long her paradise will last."Betty felt she could not meet Julia's glance at that moment, so turned aside to take a cigarette from a large silver box."Fill your case," said Julia. "They are the only cigarettes Fred lets me smoke, you can't fail to like them.""Shall you ever come back to the stage?" asked Betty, as she thrust a handful of cigarettes into her coat pocket.Julia shook her head."I don't think he would like me to work," she replied, "and really a quiet life suits me best. It makes me forget what I am, Betty; you know I was always troubled with a conscience. If I can conceal my identity, I am going to try and assist a mission in the East End. I should feel happier if I did some work for the poor."Betty's soul filled with wonder. Certainly Julia Dale was an uncommon type. Anyone else would be spending Reece's money in dissipation, and the visitor felt the good things of life were being wasted on so strange a character.Julia, in her turn, was quietly criticising Betty. What a fund of tragedy lurked in those small tired eyes which only a few months ago were large and lustrous! Hard living and late hours told upon the girl's good looks; it was easy to guess how livid her face must be under its glaring rouge. Deep burning thoughts disturbed Julia's mind."I can never have a good influence over anyone again," she told herself. "Girls like Betty would laugh me to scorn if I spoke a word of warning to them now."
They had lapsed into silence, for Betty was evidently enjoying the surrounding comfort as she watched the rings of cigarette smoke floating upwards.Suddenly the door opened, and to Julia's surprise Frederick Reece walked into the room. He looked annoyed to see a visitor, while Betty, covered with confusion, sprang to her feet and said a hasty good-bye. Apparently the man was not in a very pleasant mood, for lie failed to recognise Betty with whom in the old days he had frequently conversed."You must come again when I am alone," said Julia. "Leave your address, and I will write."With a hurried " thank you," Betty dashed away, glad to avoid Reece's cold critical gaze."That man," she said under her breath, "will be the death of Julia. She can't stand things like other people. Once she loses his love, she will only remember that she has come a cropper. Then she will sit and eat her heart out, instead of going on with the business.""So you are receiving your old friends again," he remarked a little coldly. "I thought I could always rely on finding you alone, such people bring an unsavoury atmosphere into the room."He flung himself down on the sofa beside Julia, and there was an air of weariness about him she had not noticed before.Slipping her hand into his palm she was surprised to find his touch so cold and unresponsive, and fancied he must be annoyed because of Betty's presence. A quick apology rose to her lips."I only asked poor Betty out of kindness. She looked so pitiful in the road yesterday, she made me almost ashamed of my smart clothes and comfortable living. She was very good, for she left at once—some girls wouldn't have had the tact. Fancy, she thought I was married!"Frederick Reece smiled a little grimly. Though Julia laid her head upon his shoulder he did not bend to kiss her in the old passionate way. There was something singularly frigid in his manner, an aloofness which she instinctively felt, but would not acknowledge."Whatever the world says," she thought, "this man has my soul in his keeping, and I must trust him to the end."Her eyes were blinded with love as she gazed up at the face so strangely set and hard."You look very severe! Are you still annoyed about poor Betty Brown? I could understand your being cross if you had found me with a man, but if you would rather I had no friends at all I am quite willing to obey."Frederick Reece drew in his breath and sat for a moment with clenched teeth. Then he spoke in a voice from which the softness had fled."Oh! it isn't that at all. So far as I am concerned you can enjoy the society of such people every day of your life. I feel a little worried because I have something to tell you which may not prove very pleasant hearing. I felt I couldn't let you read it in the papers, but it was bound to come. A man with money and an old name cannot always remain single."Julia leapt to her feet with a cry, and stood for a moment staring at him with fixed, vacant eyes. Then staggering to the fireplace she clung to the mantelpiece for support, as gradually her head sank down upon her hands. Slowly the words which were ringing in her brain came in broken syllables to her lips."You are going to be married?"That was all, just a bald statement, but it cut the heaven from under her feet, leaving her among the lost. No tears came to help her grief, for Julia rarely wept. Some people cry inwardly with a sobbing that none can hear, and a scalding rain no eye can see."Yes," he replied. "My future bride has just returned from America, there was a sort of understanding between us before she went away. She is very suitable. Now I intend to give up my lazy life and do something in the world, probably I shall stand for Parliament. Don't imagine I intend leaving you stranded, Julia. I shall make a small settlement upon you, and trust you never to molest me. We have been very happy together, and I hope you will look back with pleasure on the good times I have given you."Julia could say nothing, only the realisation of what had happened came upon her like a death blow. As love crept out of her disillusioned heart, she fancied she stood face to face with her own distorted soul—a thing so hideous and repulsive she felt chained to a decaying corpse. The room seemed full of voices mocking at her from every corner, while the man seated on the sofa appeared like a monster of cruelty vivisecting a living animal. Burning jealousy of the woman who would share his home and bear him children made every nerve in her body like an electric wire. Her muscles stiffened strangely, locking her in bands of iron. From head to foot she was in the grip of mental and physical pain."She is very quiet—she is taking it well," thought Frederick Reece. "Some women would have made a most unpleasant scene, but Julia was always a cut above her associates.""Perhaps it will be my turn to congratulate you next," he continued in a tone of levity. "A pretty girl with a little money won't have to wait long for a husband, and no one is likely to connect your name with mine. I can't see I have done you any harm, at least my conscience is clear on this point.""Any harm, my God! Any harm——"The words broke from Julia's lips with an intensity of feeling which startled the lethargic man and brought him quickly to her side. He placed his hands on her shoulders, feeling the tremor running through her body and noting the ashen face distorted by suffering."I believe," he thought, "she first attracted me because she feels so deeply. A woman of temperament is all right for a time, but when hard knocks come she is bound to go under. Her emotional nature responds like a violin, and perhaps I have played too freely upon the sensitive instrument. She is not sufficiently educated to understand that human passion depends no more on ourselves than the duration of our lives."Julia pushed him away with such violence he half feared for her reason, then she spoke in quick gasping sentences:"Do you think I would touch a penny of yours? I would rather be in the river! You bought me for your pleasure, and now your love is dead, you can throw your toy aside and forget that I ever existed. How could I expect anything else? I stole your money on that first night, and you have paid me back with interest. You took in return something that counts more than gold. I gave you the only thing a woman has to treasure, it was no light gift. Do you imagine I can go about as usual and face the world as if nothing had happened? The thought that you loved me seemed to sanctify the sin. Now I see it was all a pretence, I understand how deeply I have fallen. I suppose it happens every day℁the man asks, and the woman gives. It seems so little to him, and so much to her, but men can't see this point of view. You say I am none the worse, which shows the depth of your ignorance. Betty thought you treated me more kindly than the other girls you fooled, but perhaps you never pretended to them that you really loved. You can give the money you offer me to your more hardened victims. I only want to be rid of you, I only ask for death."She rushed to the door with that very same look in her eyes he had seen when he found her at the police station, the agonised expression of a hunted animal at bay. His own cold indifference gradually melted as he watched her misery. Suddenly he caught her and held her fast, though she struggled to break free."I wasn't as heartless as you suppose," he said, looking her straight in the eyes in a way which had always magnetised her in the past. "You know I cared. You were one in a thousand, Julia, and if things had been different I would have made you my wife. I ought to have told you at first there was a possibility of my being married soon, but I didn't want to shatter our dream, or spoil the joy of those happy wanderings together. Perhaps I will come and see you sometimes when it is all over, and I have settled down. It is unreasonable to take offence in this way, for I want to do what I can for you. I may have been a blackguard to others, but as I said before—you are different."Julia gave a strange, uncanny laugh."There is only one way of escape," she replied, "from the life to which you have led me. I can go where you will not dare follow. When the world holds nothing, there is always a door which leads to forgetfulness. The poorest and weakest have the right to die."A look of triumph flashed into her eyes, a light of determination which sent him suddenly cold.At least he would not have this girl's blood on his head! Something must be done to prevent her acting rashly in her present state of over-strained nerves. He rang the bell, and spoke to the maid in an undertone. As she hurried away to do his bidding, Julia fiercely demanded to know what he had said."You are not yourself," he declared. "I can't leave you alone. I am sending for a hospital nurse to stay with you until you are in a calmer mood. She will have orders not to let you out of her sight, so try and make things easy for her; in time let us hope you may grow quiet and reasonable. I daresay this talk of suicide is merely a pose on your part. You were an actress, and know how to pile on the agony. I shall stay here until I can hand you over to a professional attendant. As to this nonsense of your not taking my money you will see things in a very different light after a good long sleep. It was stupid of me to come and break bad news in the evening. One ought always to wait till the morning. Now sit down and keep quiet, it is ridiculous to lose your head over nothing."Once again Julia felt he was her gaoler as in the past. She obeyed him because she had not the strength to resist, but phantom voices still shouted in her ears, and the strange singing in her head continued."You can do what you like with me now," she said, leaning back on the cushions, her face so white and rigid she might have been a dying woman, "but you can't watch me for ever. The moment I am free I shall go my own way, and walk through the gate of oblivion."The ring of definite intention in her voice gave Frederick Reece an uncomfortable sensation. There was nothing stagey or forced in Julia's air of finality."We shall see," he said, "which of us is the stronger. You wish to die—I say you must live. Yes, we shall see which is the stronger of the two."CHAPTER XIIIIn a great grey building surrounded by a high wall, Julia Dale spent her days in solitude. Her wild talk affected the other patients, so she was put in a room apart with a special attendant, who listened lethargically to her ravings and hallucinations.It was a private asylum to which Frederick Reece had sent her to try and quiet his guilty conscience.Every now and again, the girl became suddenly calm, almost rational. Then she closed her eyes, and such a strangely peaceful smile passed over the wan face that her nurse was filled with curiosity.On one occasion after a prolonged silence, Julia, on reopening her eyes, vouchsafed some information."That small white thing has been here again," she told the nurse. "I don't know who she is, but the moment she comes into the room I forget all my troubles. I saw her once before, but only for a second. She was standing near the doorstep of a house just as I passed, on one dreadful night; the night that I was ruined."The doctors had been told that Julia's chief hallucination took the form of believing herself a fallen woman. She had certainly manifested suicidal mania, but after several consultations they were all of the opinion she would recover."Is the small white thing someone you used to know?" asked the nurse, with her usual practice of humouring a patient.Julia shook her head."She is a spirit, all shadowy and pale, but she has the sweetest face in the world. I think she must have been alive once, because she seems to understand my sufferings and the touch of her hand is like ice on my forehead; it takes away the burning pain. Sometimes I can see a wonderful angel behind her, so tall and powerful that he fills the room with light. I like it better when she comes alone, he frightens me, he is so holy and resplendent."Even as Julia spoke, Suzanne, unseen, listened to the words."We have helped her, Velvein," whispered the earthbound soul. "I never knew until now, she saw me by the doorstep that night. I tried so hard to draw her back, and I called to her as the door closed. You would not let me go in, yet we might have saved her.""The devil's sway was strong," said Velvein. "She passed beyond our influence the moment she gave herself up to the will of man. The angels would never weep if they could hold men and women from sin."Suzanne felt strangely sad as she drifted with her guide through this great building of distraught minds. Somehow these people seemed to feel her presence and know that she was there in quite a different way to the ordinary inhabitants of earth. Some shrank back frightened, and shook their fists at her with muttered curses. Others beckoned, but when she drew near they called her by strange names, thinking she was someone they had loved."You know whom I am trying to find, Velvein," she said in a tone of awe. "You told me he was here, why don't you take me to my father?"Velvein stood outside a door locked against mortals; now he drew Suzanne closer under his wing as if to shield her from sorrow."While Réné de Malincourt is in the world you will never see again the father you loved and trusted. In after life he may reassume his identity, but at present he is just a child, babbling of infantile amusements and always mistaking his wife for his mother. She has given up her home to come and live at the gates of this asylum. Each day she visits him to make sure he is well cared for, and her heart breaks afresh on every visit. She is with him now. If you can console her you will be one step nearer the goal."As Velvein stopped speaking, he drew Suzanne into a room which looked strangely familiar. In a flash she recognised the study furniture from their old home. All her father's favourite books and ornaments decorated the shelves, and a couch was drawn up to the fire on which he lay listlessly. Madame de Malincourt was seated beside him, while he complained of dulness."Why have I no one to play with, mother?" he asked. "I should like to go back to Sainte Bruyère and find my old companions. Couldn't you bring me some toys and picture books? This morning I had quite a good game of hide and seek in the garden, but they made me come in just as I was enjoying myself. I suppose I shall have to go back to school soon. When are the holidays over?"Philippa listened with a face of stone. Her once fresh complexion had changed to a leaden hue; even her lips looked grey. Only the quick rise and fall of her breast showed how deep was her emotion. Softly she stroked his forehead, for some moments unable to control her voice; then she answered in a patient tone which hid her real feelings."Yes, dear, I will bring you whatever you want. What kind of toys do you mean? You will have plenty of time to play with them, for you are not going back to school.""Splendid," he cried, rubbing his hands together and smiling in a way which always froze her blood. "I should like a few boxes of soldiers, cavalry you know. You might get me some bricks as well, to build a castle, a real big castle, like the one in France. Could you afford a gramophone? I had one once, but I can't think what became of it."He wrinkled his brow as if trying hard to remember, but Philippa quickly changed his line of thought."No, no, not a gramophone," she said, half under her breath. "I will bring you a musical box with many different tunes, and the soldiers and bricks shall be here to-night."She rose, unable to bear another word. The tears were swimming in her eyes, but they did not fall. She forced them back with an effort at self-control as she stooped to kiss him on the forehead. Suddenly he sprang up with such violence that she started back, fearing some fresh mania had seized him."Look!" he cried, "look, mother, don't you see who is by your side? I used to know that little girl, she could laugh and play; her name was Suzanne."He stretched out his arms, as if to clasp the phantom, and just at that moment, Philippa experienced a wonderful sense of fortitude. She believed that Réné, in his madness, hypnotised her to feel the sudden nearness of a lost one. Never since her bereavement had she come into any kind of communication with Suzanne's departed spirit. Now the memory of her child was so vivid it was like a waking dream, and the awful sense of separation faded mysteriously. Suzanne's arms were about her, the kiss of girlish lips pressed her cheek."Of course," Philippa told herself, "it must be only imagination, but the most glorious fancy in the world." Perhaps she had caught the power of hallucination in this house of madness. She wondered a little if her own brain were tottering."How is it that mother feels me, and knows I am here?" asked Suzanne of Velvein, as she hung about the loved one. "I could not get near her before, now it is quite easy. Father sees me, but does not know I am dead. I cannot help him, but mother is glad—so glad to have me near.""Through suffering and self-sacrifice," replied Velvein, "she has brought herself into closer touch with the spirit world. The things of earth mean little to her now; her days are spent in prayer and waiting for something better. This revelation of yourself will never leave her thoughts. It will fortify her in life, and comfort her in death. Take her by the hand, walk with her on her homeward journey; she needs you terribly."As Philippa moved away, Réné stamped his feet with annoyance. The nurse returned to her post and asked why he was angry."A little play-fellow came into the room, and my mother has taken her away. Really it is very dull being an only child! I am almost sorry it isn't time to go back to school."As Philippa walked sadly down the drive, she still retained that strange sense of companionship with the daughter she had lost."Is it possible," she asked herself, "that God has answered my prayer and let Suzanne's soul speak to mine? I could hear her voice whispering words of comfort. I know she spoke to me, for every nerve tingled."She thought how in that mysterious flash, all the dried-up sources of joy seemed to spring into life again. For the first time since that awful day at Sainte Bruyére, Philippa smiled faintly, as if spirit fingers touched her lips. Just at that moment she met Dr. Greening walking with a tall, aristocratic looking stranger, who had evidently come to visit a patient. The doctor stopped to speak, and introduced Sir Lowther Ormsley.Suzanne still hovered invisibly at her mother's side. As she looked at the man she saw straight into his heart."You recognise him?" whispered Velvein."Yes, it is Frederick Reece, yet he calls himself by another name."Velvein stretched his great white wing like a protecting shield between Suzanne and the doctor's companion."Turn your eyes away from his soul," he said. "You have seen the darkness of the world, but let him pass. His name was never Frederick Reece, that was merely a cloak for a part he played unknown to his real friends. As a wealthy baronet he holds his head high and poses as a moral citizen, who would not deign to know such a low scoundrel as Frederick Reece. It is the case of a double life."As Philippa moved on, the doctor turned to Sir Lowther with an explanation."I thought it might interest you to meet Madame de Malincourt, as there has been so much talk recently about her husband who is here. They tried hard to hush the matter up, but the French press got hold of it and then it was copied into the English papers. He attempted to murder a Mr. Carlisle in a dreadful manner, believing him responsible for the death of his daughter. I am told his victim is slowly recovering, but Monsieur de Malincourt is incurably mad; nothing could ever restore his reason. He probably won't live very long and oddly enough all his feelings of malignity towards Mr. Carlisle have faded away, he is quite passive and childish.""Your business must be a very depressing one," said Sir Lowther. "I thought that poor woman had some terrible tragedy written in her eyes. The affair interested me a good deal, for I used to meet Carlisle and thought him a very nice fellow. My wife knew his mother slightly, no wonder the shock of hearing what had happened to her son killed the poor old lady. She fell dead from heart disease as she was hurrying to Paris to see him. The papers said, a few days ago, he had not yet been told about her death. But how is my unfortunate protégée getting on? I felt I must call and have another talk with you about her, though, perhaps, it would be wiser not to tell her I am here. Has she still that unhappy hallucination in regard to her past? She is quite a good, innocent girl, yet she believes that some man has treated her badly."The doctor glanced keenly under his eyelids at the speaker, whose nonchalant air made it impossible to believe he took any but a philanthropic interest in Julia Dale."She still talks of someone named Frederick Reece, who, she says, destroyed her soul. We have had to watch her very closely, or she would certainly have taken her life. The fixed idea that she must kill herself has gradually faded away, and from certain signs, I have great hopes of her recovery.""As a matter of fact," said Sir Lowther, "I am under the impression there is no such person as Frederick Reece. Directly she is well enough I will have her sent home. Her people are in poor circumstances, and but for my intervention she would have had to go to a pauper asylum. I shall continue to see she is well cared for, since it is a deserving case. Would it be possible for me to get a glimpse of her without her knowing I was here?""Oh! yes, I think that could be managed. I will go into the room and leave the door open. While I am talking to her, you can look in, and I am sure you will think she does us credit. I had no idea when she first came, she was such a pretty girl. She has lost that wild expression in her eyes, and her mouth is regaining its proper firmness. She is beginning to take care of her appearance, which is a very good sign. She used to tear her hair down and try to strangle herself with it. The nurse wanted to cut it off, but I thought that would annoy her people; we managed to preserve it by tying it up in a bag."Julia's lover remembered, with just a faint pang, the joy he had taken in those long rippling strands of glossy hair. He was glad the girl had not been robbed of her chief beauty, for since his marriage his thoughts often wandered back to the warm-hearted child-woman who relied on him absolutely. Before his wedding, he believed sufficiently in his own fascinations to feel sure he could thaw the cold statuesque American beauty, who made such a distinguished bride. Now, on his return from the honeymoon, he was frankly disappointed. Gradually he realised he had not been married for himself alone. She had tired of single life, and he was the convenient titled husband who would add to her success in society. Frequently he contrasted this heartless icicle with the girl of flesh and blood whom his infidelity drove mad. One was a real pulsing human creature, so highly strung that he could play upon her emotions as a musician touches his violin with a skilful bow. The other was like a block of marble, gloriously modelled, but lacking life.As Dr. Greening entered Julia's room, Sir Lowther caught his breath while he stood behind the open door. The voice which stirred him so little in its recent agony, now set his pulses beating as he heard her speaking in low tremulous accents."Thank you," she was saying, "yes, my head is better. The little white thing came you know, so pure and restful, not defiled like the women who are trodden under men's feet. I wonder they let her come, only perhaps she is an angel. It is strange, isn't it, that God should think I am fit to associate with angels?"At that moment Sir Lowther stole a glance at the youthful speaker. She was looking up into Dr. Greening's face with wide questioning eyes, her checks slightly flushed and hands clasped.The girl he had always thought pretty, appeared quite beautiful to Sir Lowther at that moment. The look of insanity had entirely disappeared: there was a strange new charm about her, difficult to understand. He longed to go in and ask the doctor to leave them alone. A keen heart hunger possessed him to take her in his arms as of old, and bury his head against the white neck. Rebellion crept into his heart, sudden anger seized him, a sense of being defrauded. He had married for greater happiness, but the joy lie sought eluded him. He meant to be faithful to his wife, to proudly place her at his side and keep to her only, so long as they both lived. Now he tried to solve the problem of his failure. Was it his fault that the love lie could wake in others, failed to touch the key note of his bride's passion? He was baffled and unstrung; the sight of Julia tantalised him beyond measure. He almost wished his vows at the altar had been made to this poor insignificant girl, who had surrendered herself so completely to his love. Then, in a flash, a dangerous idea came to him. Just the germ of a tempting plan forming itself for the future, a loophole by which he might escape from boredom, and once more stand well in the eyes of Julia Dale.Now he grew impatient, and could hardly wait while Dr. Greening talked commonplaces to the patient. It seemed interminable before the brisk little man whose manner was so charming to his unfortunate lodgers, reappeared in the passage."Did you see her?" he asked with a cheery nod at Sir Lowther. "She really looks quite herself again, only she still has a few strange fancies left, which are quite harmless. She thinks some spirit comes and talks to her, and the nurse tells me this has a most soothing effect on her nerves. But the worst is over, I do not think there are any suicidal tendencies left.""I have changed my mind," said Sir Lowther, "and if you have no objection, I should like an interview with Miss Dale. May I see her alone? I always had an influence over her; perhaps I could induce her to believe that some of her hallucinations are false."Dr. Greening immediately consented."I will leave an attendant outside," he said. "You have only to touch a hand-bell on the table and she will come in at once. Stay as long as you like, I see no reason why Miss Dale should not receive friends."The doctor little guessed with what emotion Sir Lowther Ormsley entered that silent room. He stole up to the sofa before Julia realised she was in the presence of a visitor. Then she raised her hands with a little cry, covering her eyes and shrinking back as if she saw a ghost."Darling," he whispered in the old tones of love which moved her so strangely in the past. "Darling, tell me you are better? Come, you are not frightened of me? I can explain everything."He sat beside her now, drawing her within the circle of his arms. She gazed at him like one stunned from a blow, then shivered slightly."Julia," he whispered, "you have been very ill and your brain has imagined strange things. I believe you thought I was false to you, that was part of your malady, it existed only in your mind. The night your brain trouble began, you thought I had thrown you over, you believed I was going to marry another woman. Dearest, you must know now that. was all a wild dream. I am as much yours as ever, more if possible than in the past. When you are better you shall come back to the flat.We will be so happy again, forgetting all the terrible fancies and imaginings. I must build up your health and watch you more carefully, for I little thought you were on the verge of a nervous breakdown. Try and get well for my sake, that we may continue our love dream and be all the world to each other."Julia gazed at him now with a dazed expression. Only too vividly she recalled his cruel words when he told her the bitter truth which drove a sane woman into the hideous realms of madness. Was it possible that scene in the boudoir was all part of this terrible illness? She knew quite well that she had been suffering from mania, and was perfectly aware that the other patients in this place were insane. How could she disbelieve him when he looked at her with all the old light of love in his eyes?"Are you really here?" she asked him, touching his face with her hands and stroking his hair. "I thought I had lost you for ever, that was why I didn't want to live. How was it I fancied such cruel things about you?"Her lips smiled under his kisses as he hurriedly tried to explain the difficult situation."I have a brother," he said, "who is my double. You know I always told you Frederick Reece was not my real name, and you promised, when we went away together, not to try and find out my true identity. My brother is a very well known man, Sir Lowther Ormsley, and he married quite recently. I think you saw his photograph in one of the illustrated papers and mistook him for me. That was the night you thought I told you I was going to be married. Our love affair preyed on your mind, but the doctors assure me you will soon be quite well again. Think what it will mean, Julia, to be back in your dear little home where I will come and see you very often. Doesn't that prospect make it easy to get well?"Julia felt such a thrill of happiness and relief that her face was now wreathed in sunshine, while her eyes sparkled with returning intelligence."Thank God, it was all a dream!" she said in a tone of genuine elation. "Oh! my poor brain, what could have happened to make me imagine you were untrue? I suppose you couldn't come and explain the mistake before; I wasn't fit to see you. Can't I get away soon? I am so tired of this place.""Yes, very soon,"he answered, pressing a last kiss on the radiant face. " I will see Dr. Greening and try to fix an early date for your removal. You mustn't see any more angels, little one, or he will refuse to let you out."Julia had suddenly returned to the material world. She no longer sat in the darkness of despondency, nor did she need the spirit presence which fortified her in those hours of gloom. Words of love and a human touch were the medicine she needed most. Now she felt she wanted to sing for joy, since the glory of her life's summer had miraculously returned.CHAPTER XIVON leaving the asylum, Sir Lowther Ormsley went in search of Betty Brown. He guessed where he would find her, in a certain street at a certain hour, and he was not disappointed. She was strolling along in a listless manner, her eyes wandering from right to left, swinging a small hand-bag with the inevitable powder-puff. She saw him coming in the distance, and turned her head away, feigning interest in a shop window, the contents of which had become almost painfully familiar. To her surprise, the man came up and greeted her like an old friend.She peeped at him from under her lace-patterned veil, and there was a curious expression of cynicism in those world tired eyes."I thought you didn't recognise me the other day,"she said, shrugging her shoulders. "You were very high and mighty when you strode into your domain, and looked me up and down as if I had no right to exist. I hate people who know you one moment and cut you the next. Of course, I saw that something was wrong. I bet you had the devil's own row with Julia, for I hear she went clean off her head that night and was taken to an asylum. I don't suppose you have bothered to enquire how she is, but I am not surprised at any girl going crazy with such a chap as you hanging about the place."She finished her tirade with a snap of her fingers and a sudden tilting of her chin which gave her an unaccustomed air of dignity. She had thoroughly enjoyed pouring forth these home truths, watching to see the effect of her words on the man she had always called a "mountain of conceit."She might have been talking of the weather so unmoved did he appear. Then,with just the ghost of a smile,he asked her why she had such a bad opinion of him,and if it were worth while being funny at his expense?"Oh!" replied Betty,setting her teeth,"I really need not waste my breath in telling you what you already know. I do think you might have spared Julia; she always set up for being good. I could have told you what would happen that very day. When I saw her so happy I knew it couldn't last. Perhaps it would have been kinder to let her finish herself off,than live on as a raving lunatic. Balmy people make me shiver. Once I thought I was going mad myself. Lor! I shall never forget the feeling.""You talk a great deal,"replied the man,"but it happens I have something to say. Walk with me down this quiet street and try to listen intelligently. You have a good deal of sense if you care to use it. I can't help thinking you are really rather fond of Julia. I want you to do her a good turn, and make some money for yourself into the bargain."His serious tone surprised Betty. Now she raised her pencilled eyebrows and her face softened slightly."Of course I'd do Julia a good turn,if I could,"she answered unhesitatingly. "She was always kind to me,though she didn't approve of my ways; that was why I liked her. She tried to be decent to a girl who was always treading on her toes. I often went out of my way to shock her,because we had nicknamed her 'The Prude.' She never resented the way I treated her,and at last I got ashamed of myself and gave it up. Towards the end we used to hide things from her and spare her feelings,so I suppose she had a certain influence,even over the wildest people."Betty's companion noticed, as he listened, that under her air of bravado there lay a touch of human sympathy which rang true. Evidently Julia's fate hung heavily on this girl's mind."You will be glad to hear, "he said, "that Julia is getting better. I have seen her to-day and she was almost her old self again.""I don't suppose it helped matters your appearing on the scene! I heard afterwards at the flat she went clean off her head because you were going to be married."There was a pause; for the first time Sir Lowther looked uncomfortable."Betty, " he said, "you have been an actress. Can you do a little acting in real life? I have persuaded Julia that our quarrel existed entirely in her brain,and I want you to back me up,it is the only way to save her from self destruction. It was my brother who married,my double,you know,she saw it announced in the papers and all the rest was a wild dream. Things are to be just the same again,she will return to the flat,and I shall visit her frequently. I want you to give up the life you are leading,just for a time,at any rate. Stay with her,and do your best to keep her from brooding over this illness."Betty Brown drew a deep breath,for a moment she felt bewildered by this unexpected proposition."I see," she said, "you want me there as a spy, a kind of watch-dog to keep up the fiction and let you know if your dupe grows suspicious. Surely, she won't be soft enough to swallow that old wheeze of a double.""A term of raving madness in a lunatic asylum doesn't exactly sharpen the wits, " he replied satirically. "If Julia is what you call soft,that makes no difference to me. I told her just what suited me best,and she believed it,mercifully for herself. She has not a curious nature,she never tried to pry into the life I led apart from hers. I am firmly con-vinced she will come back and settle down like a happy bird in a cage,which sings all day and never longs for flight. She was looking extraordinarily lovely this afternoon,more ethereal than ever,and she clung to me with all the old fervour as if we had never been parted. You know my record for fickleness,but I tell you on my word of honour I want this girl as I have never wanted anything in life. I have tried to do without her,and the experiment proved a miserable failure. Are you willing to help me,Betty? Can I rely on your services?"He drew a bank-note from his pocket,and pressed it into the girl's hand.Now a rush of natural colour burnt into her cheeks like flame. She was trembling all over with excitement."So long as you don't break Julia's heart again, " she gasped, "I'll do all I can in the world to make things go smoothly,and keep her in the dark. I am sick of cadging about and living on my wits. If I can be of any use to Julia,I will throw my whole heart into the business,and as long as you keep your side of the bargain,I'll be your faithful servant and play square."A sigh of relief escaped him,as Betty held out her hand,which he wrung gratefully."I want you," he said, "to go and fetch Julia from the asylum directly the doctors say she is well enough. You might order yourself a new dress,something quiet and good,not showy you know,like the one you have on to-day. They think that Julia is very respectable,and you must pretend to be a relation. I suppose you wouldn't object to washing your face for once?"Betty burst into a peal of laughter."Oh! I'd make myself into no end of a frump,if it would help matters," she declared good-naturedly. "I played the part of an old spinster once,and made quite a hit. I will be prunes and prisms personified, and how it will astonish Julia! I will have whatever story you want me to tell at my finger`s ends. I suppose you will get a new maid at the flat; the old one might give away what really happened."Sir Lowther`s spirits were rising, as the difficulties of the past seemed to gradually vanish. The remembrance of Julia's warm young arms recently entwined about his neck soothed the wounded pride which had suffered so deeply at his wife's hands."What is the good of a woman, however beautiful, without a heart?" he thought. "Julia's spontaneous nature will be like a refreshing draught after a pilgrimage through the desert. I thought marriage would give me so much, but the journey only led to dry springs and emptiness."When Betty bade him good-bye her face wore a radiant expression."I came out," she said, "to look for a job. I was going into the theatrical agency just on the chance they might have something for me. I never thought to find such an easy one waiting to drop into any mouth. I have said some hard things about you, Mr. Reece, and it was kind of you not to turn away when I slanged you just now. I have been feeling all to-day that I hated men; the very sight of them walking about the streets seemed to turn me sick. When I hear girls talking of love it makes me think they must be crazy, but that's because I've been unfortunate. I suppose we always judge by ourselves.""Let us hope," he replied, "that a quiet life for a time may change those unnatural views, and make you think better of the human race. I have been feeling rather bitter against women lately, but when I saw Julia again I realised there are exceptions to every rule. She was never self-seeking, and the love she gave me rose above mercenary considerations. A devotion of that kind is too good to lose. You will stand by me, I know, it was a piece of good fortune meeting you just now."Betty glanced in the direction of the shop which had held so little attraction for her when she knew her purse was empty."I am going at once," she said, "to buy those clothes you spoke of. You shan't be disappointed in Julia's companion."The man laughed to himself as he turned away."Poor little soul," he thought, "what an effort it will be to try and look respectable! I should never have dreamt that a woman like Betty Brown could help me in my life, and prove of real service. Julia will believe her because she was there that day. Betty is just the right kind of third for a ménage like ours, sharp as a needle. She will swear anything for Julia's sake, and really show devotion to the woman she is hoodwinking. After all, who can judge between right and wrong? It is just a different point of view, and life is a dream soon ended. If I can shut Julia up in a paradise of her own, with myself and Betty for warders, it is not likely she will try to break down the golden bars."He drove back to his house in Mayfair, and as he entered the lofty hall the place seemed like a sepulchre. No bright eyes watched for his coming, and the man-servant told him her ladyship had been out since noon. A telegram lay on the table; he could guess its contents before reading them."Lady Ormsley is not returning for dinner," he said. "I shall dine at my club."As he vanished up the broad staircase, the butler watched him with rather curious eyes, and a shrug of heavy shoulders."I suppose it is modern ways," he remarked to the foot-man. "Six weeks to-day they were married, but from the look of things it might be six years. She can't blame him if he consoles himself elsewhere. Something must have happened, for she has completely changed. She seemed quite happy on her wedding day. If I were married, I'd rather have a woman who spat fire at me than icy indifference. She must freeze the master up. He looks miserable, and in spite of all his money, I pity him."Sir Lowther, quite unaware he was an object of commiseration to his servants, felt a thrill of joy as he dressed for dinner. His thoughts were full of Julia and the alluring charm of reunion. He would not confess to himself how bitterly his home disappointed him. His wife's attitude was a problem he dared not try to solve."There is only one attraction in my bride's coldness, at least it holds the charm of mystery," he thought. "With most women one knows their minds as well as the clothes they wear; perhaps that is why so many married men live like bachelors. With Julia one exists in a fiery coloured world, but Eva's beauty expresses nothing. La Rochefoucauld defines love as 'a passion for reigning'; when Julia returns any kingdom will come."CHAPTER XVFOR some weeks Hugh Carlisle lay at Sainte Bruyère hovering between life and death. Directly he was well enough he was removed to Dr. Giraudet's residence in Paris. The specialist was far too busy a man ever to have patients in the house, but he made an exception of Carlisle. The averted tragedy took a great hold upon his imagination. It interested him deeply to see this fellow creature, who had been tortured in a living tomb, creeping back to the old world. Gradually he realised the extraordinary alteration which must have taken place in his patient. Photographs of de Malincourt's victim appeared in many of the papers, accompanied by graphic descriptions of the attempted crime. They showed a man in the prime of life, absolutely different from the Hugh Carlisle of to-day. Though his brain was quite clear, he hardly seemed in touch with surrounding humanity. He was a body dragged back from the grave after the soul had been in communication with another sphere. From a man of strong physique, he had become so emaciated, his face was hardly recognisable to those who knew him previously. His hair was white, while his eyes were those of a mystic, looking beyond present surroundings, seeing what others could not discern.Dr. Giraudet, whose whole life was given up to the study of mind and brain, could not resist questioning his patient as to how much he remembered.Carlisle spoke quite simply of his experience. He recalled every detail before he lapsed into unconsciousness. The words with which de Malincourt had taunted him were burnt into his brain for ever; he knew by heart every inflection of the record containing Suzanne's voice."The sooner you try to forget, the better it will be for your health," said Dr. Giraudet during one of their many conversations. " Try and put the whole matter aside as if it were an evil dream. If you dwell upon it you will retard your progress; already your recovery has been slower than I hoped."Carlisle smiled as he looked at the man of science with whom he had grown strangely familiar. They were like two old friends, for Dr. Giraudet had not only shown skill, but sympathy."There is something," said Hugh Carlisle, "that even a man of your intuition has failed to understand. To all intents and purposes I was dead when you dragged me out of my vault, and forced me to live again by untiring efforts. I can't help wishing sometimes you had been less successful. When the pangs of death are over, one would prefer to be left alone; it is not often the lot of man to have to die twice. Now you expect me to be as I was before. You would like to see me interesting myself in mundane matters, you are surprised I have not asked after my friends, or cared to see the papers. When you brought my letters I did not trouble to open them; all the things of earth seem to have passed beyond my province. I am only interested in what I left behind. I reached the spirit world, I know that for a certainty. I met the only woman I ever really loved. Among the many affairs of the heart, for every living man there is just one that makes or mars the world. Such love cannot be killed by death. The soul, which has passed on, is waiting for its mate, just as it would wait on earth if divided by space and circumstance. Now it is possible I may have a long life before me, but that part of me left in the other world will always be the stronger, I mean the soul which you could not call back. No doubt this all seems very fanciful to you, just the crazy imaginings of a sick man's brain. Considering my health in the past I ought to have recovered more quickly, only you prosaic doctors do not call the soul into account."As the man of science listened, no shadow of cynicism lurked in his keen face or probing eyes. He recognised the truth of Carlisle's words. This was no ordinary case, but a thing apart. The man had suffered a slow, agonising death. He had died by inches in the dark dungeon at Sainte Bruyère, before angels came and ministered to him. Dr. Giraudet, like so many of his class, had absolutely discarded any orthodox religion; yet he was no atheist. He believed in the existence of the soul, and some supreme power influencing the life of every human being. He was conscious of a strange atmosphere surrounding his patient, the glow perhaps of rapturous moments experienced in another state. He never got rid of the feeling he was talking to a ghost, and that, for Carlisle, the present was a dream, the hereafter reality. He knew his patient had a peculiar effect on the servants in the house, who were prosaic enough until the sick man became one of the family. They knew he was not mad, and received nothing but kindness at his hands, yet they were palpably terrified of him. The maid who took up his meals before he left his bed, on several occasions trembled so violently she could hardly enter the room. Later she arranged always to be accompanied by a fellow servant who waited in the passage outside. More than once the doctor heard them discussing Mr. Carlisle when they thought their master absent. They spoke of the newcomer as a man from the grave, they believed him supernatural and able to work good or evil at will.Dr. Giraudet remonstrated with them on their folly, declaring, though he knew what he said was false, that Mr. Carlisle was exactly the same as any other guest. There was nothing uncanny about him, save that he looked like a living skeleton, the result of a long illness.To-day, as he talked to his patient, he decided it was time the sick man took an interest in outside matters."Carlisle," he said, "I have something to tell you which you must learn now you are stronger, and able to bear the news. I wish I had only pleasant things to say, for after all you have suffered it is hard to have to face a fresh sorrow."He paused, to note how his listener received the words.Hugh looked up, but little interest crept into his eyes and no expression of fear. He had the air of a man who was absolutely above earthly suffering, and was surprised the doctor could think material matters counted at all."Probably," he replied, "some of my speculations have gone wrong. It is very difficult to think of money when easy living matters so little. Now I could be as happy in a garret as a palace. It doesn't matter where my body is housed, I have something else to think of. I must live on memory and hope.""Rather the reverse," replied his companion, "for the sad news I must break leaves you a wealthy man. Your poor mother, who, I understand, always suffered from her heart, fell dead the day after we found you at Sainte Bruyère. Endless letters from your solicitors have been necessarily kept back. She left you her entire fortune and an historic old house in Chelsea, her residence at the time of her death."Carlisle leaned forward, and his chin dropped between his hands. Just for the moment his whole body was convulsed, then pulling himself together with an effort, he smiled in that weird unnatural way which gave some colour to the servants' views. It was the smile of a man who understood things hidden from the rest of his fellows. It seemed to defy death and the grave, like some disembodied spirit materialized to talk with man."My mother is very fortunate," he murmured. "I shall miss her, but to regret her would be a sin. Except for your meddling, my good friend, she and I would be together now. It is no good to fight against destiny. Perhaps when I reach my second death I shall be better fitted to rejoin my loved ones. The old house you speak of was very dear to me in childhood. My mother always wanted me to continue to live with her there, but the presence of an older person is a restraint on a man when he is young and full of life. I visited her often, but clung to my independence. Those were the days of wild pleasures and fast living. I suppose every man of the world has been through that phase. I was just ready to draw up, and welcome a blessed change, when I met Suzanne de Malincourt. If things had been different how full my life might have proved! I knew then what real feeling meant; for the first time I touched happiness. I suppose I have been lying here long enough inert and dreaming. I noticed some of those letters I threw aside were on black-edged paper, I expect I have neglected to answer endless condolences. It is difficult to picture the empty house which I shall now make my home. I am not sure yet what my life will be. I shall have to search for something I never tried to find in the past. I hardly know whether it is called religion or the foundation of our being. I know I want to get at the heart of things, to understand life, death and eternity. Rather a presumptuous ambition you may think, a goal which the wisest fail to reach. Knowledge is the only thing worth living for, we are put into the world to seek, yet most of us exist day by day like animals, eating, drinking, sleeping and rising up to play. I could not find a better refuge than the home which is now empty; the very place for a recluse."Dr. Giraudet felt some decided misgivings as he listened to the rambling words. He wished his patient could take a healthier interest in his recovery and grieve for his mother's death in a natural manner. Carlisle's whole attitude was so aloof, so entirely different from that of an ordinary man under similar circumstances."The press," said the doctor, "has apparently taken a great interest in your affairs, and only the other day I read an account of your mother's residence. If you wish to lead a quiet life, at any rate you have inherited one of the finest libraries in London. Your father, I know, was a deep reader and added to the family collection. Perhaps you will do well to remain a mystic for a time, then by degrees the busy world with its many allurements may charm you back; you will forget your entry to the 'Valley of the Shadow.'"Carlisle looked incredulously at the speaker."Forget! Really, doctor, for a man of your worldly wisdom and discernment, the word is unworthy. Are the greatest experiences of life ever forgotten? Then, how can a death experience be wiped out? Now I will tell you what really occurred during those hours of darkness. The woman I had loved and lost came to me suddenly in a way no mortal could comprehend. Men and women think that earthly ties make them one, the flesh seems so strong that to mortals it is enough, simply because they are in the school-room of real sensation. The mingling of spirit is quite a different matter, but how am I to make you understand? In life you never really know the one who loves you best. There is always a barrier. We tell each other our thoughts and try to express our feelings, but the twin soul can never be sure its confidant is absolutely true. The speaker may de-ceive himself, but once the trammels of earth are swept away, two identities may merge into one. When Suzanne appeared to me, in the Sainte Bruyeère dungeon, I was of her world, in the spirit. No thought needed to be told. It was all an open revelation, a unity which those on earth could never realise. Thought working with thought, brain tuned to brain, ego mingling with ego! Just as you broke the spell we were drifting away together in an ecstasy of triumph. Then suddenly she let me go, and a tall shining form came between us, some fiery angel with wings of steel. It seems as if he cut me off with a knife, and I knew that earthly hands drew me back, while the old throes of bodily pain returned. Oh! I could have cursed you, but even in my trance I knew you wished me well. It was just a great cruel mistake for which I cannot blame you."In everyday life Dr. Giraudet did most of the conversation. In Carlisle's presence he often found himself tongue-tied, compelled to listen, conscious his patient was not really addressing him, but just speaking his thoughts aloud. The doctor could never quite escape from the feeling they were words from another world."I shall be interested to hear if your search for knowledge satisfies you at all," said the man of science, who had read deeply in his youth. "You will smile when I tell you my parents intended me for a priest, and that, as a boy, I was strangely attracted by all the mysteries of religion. I was not a bigoted Catholic, and perhaps it was the strictness of my parent's views which made me eventually break away altogether, and turn to medicine. I thought I would try to heal the body instead of the soul, but the common Ills of the flesh seemed uninteresting in comparison with the great problem of nerves and brain. You know I went to England on a hurried visit only the other day, it was to see de Malincourt. His wife wanted me to consult with the other doctor, and she enquired for you with tears in her eyes. There is no hope for her husband, which, perhaps, is as well. He is happier in his present position than having to stand his trial as a sane man.""I sometimes think," replied Carlisle, "that Réné de Malincourt would have made one of the greatest actors of our time. From the first he must have acted to me, when he suggested over a friendly dinner that I should go with him to Paris, in order that we might both try to forget our grief. As we walked to the ruin that morning, he was one of the pleasantest companions, with all the joie de vivre of his race. I almost thought he had forgotten Suzanne and marvelled at his cheerfulness. I have no evil feelings to-wards him now, for I know what that sorrow meant, and cannot wonder it broke his brain. At the time his fiendish trick seemed so inhuman, I don't think I could have kept my hands off him had I escaped. It was thought out with such cold calm devilry."Dr. Giraudet sought to change the subject, not wishing his patient to dwell on gruesome memories."It is no good thinking of de Malincourt," he said, "I ought not to have mentioned him. If your curiosity prompts you to visit him at any time, fight against the inclination. It will be bad for your health and could not profit you in any way, besides being harmful to him. Stay for a while with your books, and when they weary you, try to take back to your heart the old pleasures. Don't forget you are a young man because of your white hairs.""How strange," said Carlisle, "that you should have been intended for a priest! There is always something of the father confessor in your manner when you are trying to probe the mind of a patient. I was brought up in no strict religious school, so I can launch myself on the sea of investigation without a shadow of prejudice. My journey into the unknown makes me feel the need of religion as I never did before. I shall approach my studies with an unbiassed mind.""Many men," said the doctor, "have sought a spiritual foundation upon which to build, by going back to the earliest records, hoping to find some explanation of the future life. There is much to be learnt from every religion. Charity, chastity, and worship form the foundation of nearly all. The root of religion was invariably the aspiration to a higher level of existence. The great drawback is superstition, that offspring of ignorance, which steps in to mar the original excellence. The thirst for knowledge, which you feel today, is inherent in all human beings and was the common origin of superstition. It gave rise to the creation of imaginary beings or gods to satisfy that thirst. For instance, the rustling of the leaves in the forest gave birth to the Wood Nymph, the spiral wreath of mist rising on the mountain was the spirit of the air, and the white vapour drifting across the water was the breath of the river god. So this mythology became little more than superstition classified, and arranged into a system. Even Christianity seemed unable to thoroughly root it out, since some of the very ancient theories are embodied in its existing form. The symbols assigned to the four evangelists by the Early Church were astrological signs known thousands of years before Christ; so you will find yourself met with contradiction in every direction. Yet I am not suggesting you should give up the quest as I did. When we meet again, you must tell me if your intellectual journey has brought you to the light."There was a new look of strength about Carlisle as he rose from his couch and stretched his arms."I must take up my life again," he said, "and throw off the lethargy which you have treated so kindly. I should like to open all my letters to-night, and answer as many as I can. I suppose there will be no objection to my returning home the beginning of next week? The house is waiting for me, and I sincerely hope friends will respect both my illness and mourning, leaving me in peace. Whenever you come to London, doctor, you will know where to find a welcome."Dr. Giraudet had no wish to keep his patient back, for he felt the time was at hand when the old life must be taken up again. He encouraged Carlisle to attend to necessary business, declaring he could certainly travel the following week if his progress still continued."He will be a recluse for a time," thought the doctor, "but his friends won't leave him alone for long. A man with a history is always interesting, especially when he is a wealthy bachelor in a gay city like London."It was an effort to Carlisle to concentrate his mind on mundane affairs, he felt all the time as if it were a kind of insult. He was in a false position, forced back into a world to which he did not belong, made to serve like some wretched recruit pining to desert the ranks he had ignorantly joined. He felt a great affection for Dr. Giraudet as a man, but no gratitude towards him as a doctor. The patient's attitude was one of lenience, knowing he had done his duty. Madame de Malincourt, too, was among the transgressors, for now Carlisle realised it was through her prompt action the searchers found him in his tomb.The journey back to England was uneventful, and he was too distrait to notice how many curious glances he attracted. Even the most unimaginative passer-by could not fail to observe something unusual in this man. Perhaps it was only the cold aloofness of his bearing, or the fact of the snow white hair framing a face still young, though haggard.When his mother's housekeeper greeted him in the old home at Chelsea, she burst into a wild fit of hysterical weep-ing. He put her grief down to the death of her late mistress, and tried to explain the uselessness of shedding tears for those who had gone."You see, Mrs. Holland," he said, "my mother was mercifully taken without a day's suffering or illness. Sudden death is a terrible shock for those who are left, but a wonderful boon to the soul which can pass on without a pang. I only hope I may leave the world as easily when my time comes."The woman, who was an old family servant, and had known him since a baby, looked at the changed face with widely dilated eyes."It wasn't for her I was crying," she admitted, "though you know how I loved my dear lady, and what her loss means to me. It is the sight of you, Mr. Hugh, which has shocked me so terribly. If I could get at that brute who tried to bury you alive, I would tear him limb from limb."She was a strong woman with muscular arms, and looked at the moment as if she could really have carried out her threat."Do I appear very changed to you?" he queried, as he glanced round the old domain which somehow seemed strangely different now it was all his own. He could hardly believe his mother's familiar figure would not emerge from the drawing-room with the customary welcome. He felt a tightening of his heart strings, while vague regrets thronged into his mind. He might have done more, visited her with greater regularity, written the letters so often postponed."That's a queer question to ask me," said Mrs. Holland, pointing to a mirror in the large square hall, quaint with carvings and rich with tapestry. "You have only to look in the glass to see for yourself. You are more like your grandfather's portrait, the one that hangs up there. He is thin with age, and his white head is the crown of glory we read of in the Scriptures. You seem almost a boy to me still, but your youth has been killed by a cruel enemy. I thought something was going to happen. Just as we heard the dreadful news about you, there were strange sounds in the house. My mistress said it was only the oak panelling, which cracks in damp weather, but I couldn't believe her, it sounded so uncanny. Then one evening the bell pealed; I happened to be in the hall, and opened the door immediately. Nobody was waiting to come in, though I looked up and down the street to make sure it wasn't a runaway ring. The place was quite deserted, and I remembered the legend in your family that an unseen hand always rings a bell violently before a death in the house.""Living here so much alone has made you superstitious," said Hugh indulgently, picturing the terrified woman standing alone on the doorstep behind the quaint iron torch extinguishers, which showed the house existed in the time of link boys and sedan chairs.The ancient building faced the river, having once been a shooting box of Henry VIII. Since then many large and stately rooms had been added to the mansion which certain chronicles included among the well-known haunted houses of Chelsea.Mrs. Holland apologised for her depressing words."I meant to meet you with a smile and try to cheer you up, sir," she said, drying her eyes. "But there, you must look more like your old self before you can expect me to be merry!""My old self can never return," he thought, as he moved away. "She little knows this is practically the home of a dead man."CHAPTER XVI"You are weary with your pilgrimage through the world," said Velvein.He knew he spoke truly as he looked down at the drooping figure by his side."I have lost all count of time," replied Suzanne. "Often I think it must be years since the old days when earth meant everything. There are so many changes, my parents are quite different people, and Hugh Carlisle is a white-haired man. The sorrows are so great and so many, they confuse me. If I did not know it must all pass quickly I could not bear the sights I have seen, or the sounds I have heard. Sometimes, Velvein, you are so dreadfully relentless; you have spared me nothing in our pilgrimage. I could never have dreamt creation was so cruel. Every corner of the earth holds suffering. Can we not find one spot which is free from care?"Velvein was looking down at her, and his face had never appeared so human before."At first," he said, "it was all like a dream, until gradually you began to feel and sympathise. Then you were permitted to come into touch with those who suffered. You little knew how highly you were favoured when God placed in your hands the work of angels. Every day you are growing stronger for your final flight, but before you leave the world of sorrow, I may possibly show you some of its joys. You felt the borderland of rapture, when you cradled the spirit of the man you loved in arms which grew strong with divine compassion. You spoke to Hugh Carlisle thinking he had really come to you. But for man's interference you might have kept him for ever at your side. When human hands drew him back, they chained you to the world for a time, and arrested your progress. Freedom was no longer so sweet. The earth-life cast a shadow which has only just begun to fade."Suzanne knew that her guide was right. Now she felt less in touch with those she had loved in the world."I used to think people were very much alike," she said, "but you have shown me every heart is oh! so different. How much more interesting human existence would be if people realised the hidden depths of personality! The flesh is such a barrier; mortals are all locked up in prisons talking to each other through dividing walls. The heart is never laid bare except between lovers; even then much may be hidden. I suppose sin is at the bottom of it all. Reticence comes through trying to hide thoughts and feelings which never reach the desired standard. If envy and hatred could be stamped out, the barriers would break down, and each buried identity rise from its tomb.""That would be the resurrection of the dead," said Velvein. "Really they only live when they come to us. The rest is a fevered dream, a long rebellion against the inevitable. All men fear death, yet few really value life. They treat it as a drudgery; they are afraid to enjoy, and afraid to mourn. Fear walks at their side, always holding them back from real happiness. Only the souls of little children are quite free from haunting doubts and inward cares. They are so much nearer the angels. You wanted to see the joys of life, I will show you the heart of an innocent child.""On our travels," replied Suzanne, "I have caught sight of children
in the distance, but you never let me go near them. I fancy they might
see me though I am invisible to
older eyes. The mad people saw me, but their world was so full of
hallucination it made but little difference; I was only one of many
visions. If I can speak to children they will think I am alive
again. I should like to laugh into their faces, and hold their
hands. Perhaps they would remember me in after years, and feel less
afraid of death."Hugh Carlisle made no change in the household arrangements at Chelsea, leaving everything as it had been in his mother's lifetime. Mrs. Holland was to supervise the management; he only wanted peace and leisure to indulge his new craze for research. As a matter of fact the house-keeper insisted on seeing him every morning, if only for a few minutes. She would have liked to prolong the interview, but he was in the habit of cutting her conversation short, often hardly seeming to hear what she said. One morning he was in a particularly distrait mood when she came to him with a request."I wonder if you would mind, sir," she began somewhat diffidently, "if my two little nieces and my nephew Alfred came to tea here this afternoon, and played in the garden.""Why, of course," he answered quickly. "You need never trouble to ask, for you know the garden is quite deserted now.""Yes, sir," she replied, "but your library window opens on to the terrace. I was afraid the children would make a noise and disturb you when you are reading."The garden was only a small strip of ground shut in by an ivy covered wall. The grass was well kept and green, while the birds seemed particularly attracted to the few old trees planted some hundreds of years ago. The influence of the past hung over the place, giving it a weird charm. Here and there a weather-beaten stone figure was visible through a bank of ferns, a noseless boy and a one-armed woman, with two little dwarfs wearing the quaintest clothes.Hugh Carlisle did not give another thought to the children. He was far too absorbed in his studies to care if a whole school treat made merry in the deserted garden. He had recently discovered in his researches the many contradictions of which Dr. Giraudet had spoken. His mind had been deeply moved by the ancient Egyptians' worship of the dead, and the magical texts in their sacred "Book of the Dead." To-day he was studying the religion of the Hittites. Strangely enough, they held sacred the equilateral triangle which fore-shadowed the three-in-oneness of the Trinity. From that he turned to the religion of Babylonia, whose followers worshipped the Sea God, hearing his voice in the sound of the waves, seeing his power in the ebbing and flowing of the tides. Night and day represented evil and good. As Carlisle read the romantic legend, it carried him back to the fairy tales of his childhood. It was told in the following words:—"Between the powers of evil Darkness, and Merdock, the holy son of light, a dreadful struggle rages morn after morn, and eve after eve. Each morning the sun god rises, clad in glistening armour, to find the dark serpent of the night coiled round the earth, holding it in bondage. The sun god darts his arrows, the first rays of light. The serpent is wounded; the wounds grow wider and wider, their edges are tinged with golden red, the blood of the dragon, which slowly uncoils. The sun god strikes him with his curved sword and with a blow from his mace crushes his brain. The head of the serpent is bruised, and defeated, he slinks away. By evening the sun god, having made his triumphal progress through the heavens, sinks to his rest where the gates of the setting sun, guarded by Scorpion Kerybim, open to receive him. As he reaches the threshold the reborn serpent of the night creeps gradually on the victorious sun god, and wounds him in the heel." Thus, day by day, the head of the serpent is bruised in the morning, yet night by night, he comes upon the path of the conqueror to bruise his heel.On thinking over this strange Babylonian fantasy, Carlisle remembered the words in Genesis, "It shall bruise thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel."Thus it appeared many of the doctrines set forth at the present day originated in Babylon, the mother land of culture and civilisation.Suddenly a merry shout of laughter broke upon his ears, recalling the days when he played in that same little garden while his father sat studying books. Involuntarily he rose, curious to see the place once again occupied by young people. When Mrs. Holland had mentioned the matter that morning it appeared of absolute indifference to the owner of the house. Now he moved to the square paned window as though a magnet drew him.The three children were playing with the exhilaration of high-spirited youth. No older eyes, so far as they knew, watched their gambols on the lawn. There was something peculiar about the trio which riveted Carlisle's attention. They looked so radiantly happy, as if in the presence of someone they loved. The smallest child, a mere baby, toddled forward with outstretched arms, while the others followed, palpably excited. It seemed from their movements as if a fourth were with them, whom the lookers-on could not discern. He opened the window softly to hear what they were saying."Catch her, Alfred, don't let her go. Oh! you are stupid!"The eldest girl was evidently contemptuous at her brother's failure to carry out this demand."I couldn't help it," he cried. "She slipped away. You try, if you are so clever!"Alfred was inclined to sulk, as he watched the girl with long straight hair and thin legs, dancing across the grass in pursuit of some unseen playmate."I'll hide now and you shall seek," she called to the one she followed.It was Alfred's turn to laugh, for evidently his sister had also been defeated in the quest."You see," he said, "you can't catch her, she does just what she likes. Oh! there she is, playing with baby. Ask her to stay quiet and tell us a story.""No, she won't," replied the girl. "Didn't you see how she shook her head? That's because she doesn't like to be ordered. I believe she wants us to talk to her.""I'm too out of breath," said Alfred, "let us wait and see if she will come quite near. I caught her hand just now, but it was gone in a minute."The three children seated themselves on the grass in an expectant circle. Then from the expression on their faces it was evident their desire had been gratified. They were leaning forward with their elbows on their knees, each little chin clasped in a pair of hands which dared not move."Yes, she will tell us a story if we keep quite still, but we mustn't touch her, that's forbidden."For a few minutes they sat in rapturous silence, until the baby with a cry of delight tumbled forward with outstretched arms and broke the spell."Oh! you naughty girl, you've done it now," cried Alfred, as he and his sister picked her up with a peremptory shake. "Look! our friend is saying good-bye."Carlisle still watched them from the library window."Luckily youth has the glorious gift of imagination," he thought with a sigh. It can always pretend and create its own companions. These children are playing some game of make-believe, and their fancy has provided a far more attractive guest than their aunt could have done."He saw them run to the gate and clutch at the iron bars, as if trying to follow someone who had passed out irrespective of bolts."Oh! don't go," he heard the boy shout, while his sister piped anxiously:"When will you come back?"The baby toddler at her side broke into a dismal howl. Then the three, hand in hand, returned dejectedly to the lawn. All the joy of the afternoon had apparently vanished.Now thoroughly interested, Carlisle stepped out on to the terrace calling the children to him."Hullo! What are you looking so doleful about? The sun is still shining you know, the dragon of night hasn't conquered him yet.""Oh! listen, he is saying something about dragons," whispered the boy, his face brightening. "Come along, jenny, perhaps he can tell us where the pretty lady has gone."The three moved timidly nearer to Carlisle. The girl was pulling her little sister by the hand, while the boy preceded them as if to prove he was not shy."If you please, sir," he said, "could we have the lady back to play with us?""What lady?" asked Carlisle, puzzled by the question. "I watched your game in the garden, but there was no one with you."Jenny, attracted by his kindly manner, edged up to him with an air of confidence."We can't think where she came from, but she was very pretty and she did know how to play! She kept running away to make us follow, and she was always smiling. Baby loved her, and she is very frightened of strangers as a rule. We don't know how she got through the gate, we tried to follow her, but it was locked. Aunt told us we must stay alone in the garden. She didn't know anything about the lady, I'm sure."Jenny spoke in a very convincing tone. She had been made old by the life of the city, and her post as guardian to the baby sister clinging to her skirt. She had an air of knowing everything, though she was only seven.Carlisle, distinctly puzzled, determined to hear more, asking them if they would like to see the old men's faces in the library. He thought the boy would be amused by some strange Japanese masks which hung round the fireplace. In this way he hoped to find out something more about the weird visitor.The three walked rather cautiously through the open door, as if entering a den of thieves. They were not quite certain yet whether they could trust the tall man who had watched them at their play. Suddenly the eldest girl gave a little cry of delight. Then she ran towards a desk where Carlisle had been making notes."Look!" she cried, pointing to a photograph in a frame. "There is the lady; now you will know who she is."Alfred edged to her side, and he, too, stared with a look of recognition at the enlarged portrait of Suzanne. Together the two lifted up the fat toddler that she might see the picture. The man watched her stretch out two dimpled baby arms just as she had done in the garden. For a moment he could not speak, unable to analyse the feelings which turned him numb. He knew now why he had forgotten everything, and turning away from his books felt drawn to the garden. Suzanne's influence was there, bringing brightness into the lives of these little children. He tried to speak without betraying his excitement."Where did she come from?" he asked. "Tell me exactly all that she said and did."Jenny declared that the lady came from the old tree by the wall, but Alfred had first seen her among the ferns on the opposite side. They were very vague in their account; all they knew was that they liked her very much, and wanted to see her again."I did not see her, though I was looking out," said the man, and his voice trembled."Perhaps she didn't want you to," said the matter-of-fact Alfred. "She could dodge about, you know, and I expect she only cared to play with us, and not be with grown up people."The boy evidently looked on her as almost a child like himself; it was some time before Carlisle could persuade his little visitors to leave off fingering the portrait. He completely forgot the story of Day and Night he meant to tell them, forgot everything but the wonderful fact that those childish eyes had seen the visionary face always in his mind."Perhaps," he argued, "my thoughts of Suzanne materialized, or possibly the angels sometimes visit the pure in heart."Mrs. Holland was full of apologies when she found her charges had intruded into the master's room.A wild hope rushed into his mind that their presence might bring Suzanne back to the old garden."I believe you wanted to see the lady," said the discerning Jenny, as she held out a thin hand in farewell. "Just as she ran away she kissed me here on my forehead."Carlisle bent down and touched with his lips the spot indicated. It was such a cold little forehead that a strange thought flashed through his mind."Poor little London child! I wonder if the spirit's kiss was a sign of early death."As Mrs. Holland marshalled them away, Carlisle asked her to come and see him when her guests had gone. She was surprised at the request, still half afraid the children had really given offence."You had no right to go into the master's room," she said reprovingly. "It was very wrong. I told you to stay in the garden and not to make any noise."Jenny was quick to defend her action."He asked us himself; he came out and called us. We saw the pretty lady's photograph on his table. Who is she?""Oh! that's no affair of yours," replied Mrs. Holland. "She was his great friend once, but something happened. Still, as I said before, it doesn't matter to you; it isn't a story for children."She diverted their thoughts with a sumptuous tea.Little suspecting what had really occurred, she silently registered a vow never to let them play in the garden again.Carlisle was seated in a deep reverie when Mrs. Holland tapped at his door."You wanted to see me, sir," she said, noting his increased pallor and the dark lines beneath his eyes."It was only about the children," he replied, trying to conceal his keen interest in the subject. "That little girl, Jenny, I think they called her, doesn't look strong. The other two are so robust and healthy. Is anything the matter with her?"Mrs. Holland appeared flattered at the kindly enquiry."Well, sir," she declared. "I always think it's Jenny's appearance that wins her sympathy. She is such a skinny little mortal, never has had any flesh on her bones to speak of. She is kept pretty busy running errands for the family, and doing the house work after school hours. I say her mother drives her too hard, but there! my brother would marry a frivolous bit of goods, not really fit to be the mother of a family."Carlisle considered a moment, and his eyes strayed to Suzanne's portrait. He could almost fancy the lips moved, while the sweet face pleaded for an overworked child."Have Jenny here on a visit," he suggested, "and see what rest and good food will do. You might even adopt her altogether in time, for I understand those children live in the heart of the city, and here there is a garden to play in. Yes, let Jenny play in the garden as often as she likes. I don't believe she will be dull there."Mrs. Holland was overcome by this kind suggestion."I'll do my best to get her mother to consent," she declared, after she had thanked the master. "Jenny is a queer little thing, sometimes she seems so matter-of-fact, then all of a sudden she surprises me. Lots of people have told my brother they hardly think she will grow up. She gets lighter and runs to waste. That is not natural anyhow."Carlisle turned to a book to indicate he had heard enough of the subject, but when Mrs. Holland left the room he found himself still thinking of Jenny, whose eyes had filled with mystery when she spoke of their playmate in the garden."Perhaps," he thought, "she will attract the influence again. Why should the vision be withheld from me, I who need it so sorely?"His heart was full of rebellion as once more he moved to the window, and looked out on the grass where the children had played. The garden gate had never been unlocked since his mother's death.The sound of a motor horn reached his ears, and suddenly a vision of Suzanne's last night on earth flashed vividly across his mind."My God!" he thought, "it was only a few months ago, and now I am dried and old. The world is outside with its fevered pulse, its perpetual movement. But I am here as much in a living grave as when the door of the Sainte Bruyère dungeon closed upon me. The love of life can never come back; that was all in Suzanne's keeping, and she has changed it to a longing for death."He looked towards one particularly bright star which shone in the sky like a beacon of hope. It seemed telling him to go on with his search, and his thirst for knowledge increased."If I could build a rock of faith," he told himself, "at least I should have something to hope for, something to cling to."Returning to the library he took up his books again, and lost himself in the imagery of the past.CHAPTER XVII"I CAN'T believe I am really leaving to-day," said Julia, as she looked round the sitting-room in which she had spent so many painful hours of restless misery. "I am half afraid of waking up to find it all a dream. I used to think I was here for life in a kind of penal servitude. Do many of your patients recover as quickly?"The nurse looked at her sympathetically, for she was genuinely glad such a young and pretty girl had regained her senses."It depends," she replied. "I am sure the doctors always thought you would recover in time, that is why I liked nursing you, we hate the hopeless cases."Julia watched her boxes being carried down with a peculiar sense of satisfaction. It was strange to leave a place in which she had received much kindness without a pang of regret. She fervently hoped she would never see the nurse or the doctor again. With a smile of secret amusement, she re-read the letter she had received that morning from Betty Brown."I am coming to take you back to the flat," ran the ill-written words. "You must pretend I am your cousin, and be sure I won't disgrace you."The doctor appeared at that moment to bid Julia good-bye. He told her a taxi was waiting outside with a young lady who seemed rather nervous of coming in."Oh, yes!" said Julia, "it is my cousin Betty. I expect she is terrified at the thought of visiting a lunatic asylum. I wonder she is not afraid of me, but I suppose you have given me a very good character after this long period of waiting."It seemed to Julia an eternity since Frederick Reece visited her, and changed the whole prospect of the future. Eight days had really elapsed, days in which she made rapid progress, forgetting the sorrows of the past and looking ahead with her heart full of trust.As Betty stepped out of the taxi, she was suddenly conscious of a figure at her side. She found herself face to face with a foreign-looking man, who bowed low, and with a flourish of his hand, offered her a large cherry coloured balloon."My mother brought me five of these this morning," he said in delighted accents. "I sat on two of them, one got caught in a tree, and the other I have hidden away in a safe place. You shall have this because you have just come here, and will want something to cheer you up. They won't worry you with lessons, but sometimes it is very dull; that is why I have new toys every day."Betty looked seriously alarmed, and was just about to spring back into the taxi for protection, when one of the attendants came up and interfered."The lady doesn't want the balloon; she has only come on a visit, she has no time to stay and play."He looked so disappointed that Betty felt ashamed of her timidity. He was evidently very harmless, for with a dejected air he instantly allowed his companion to lead him away.Running after him, Betty stammered an apology."Please don't think I am ungrateful," she said. "That is just the loveliest balloon I have ever seen, only I didn't want to take it from you. You must have a very kind mother to bring you so many presents! Are you really fond of toys?"She was looking at the lines of age upon his brow, and the deep furrows under his eyes. His hair, too, was tinged with grey, and the form, once so upright and alert, appeared half its natural size from a now chronic stoop. Suddenly the pinched face grew bright with merriment, the old expression of foreign vivacity glistened in the man's eyes."Yes," he exclaimed, "you see my mother has heaps of money, enough to buy up the whole of Sainte Bruyère and rebuild the castle."He tossed the balloon in the air and ran to catch it, and as he did so, Betty spoke to the attendant."What castle does he mean?" she asked with a little shudder."He is thinking of some place he knew as a child," came the quick reply. "He is quite harmless, only he thinks he is a little boy again, and forgets many dreadful things which happened quite a short time ago."Betty occasionally read the papers, and somehow the name of Sainte Bruyère sounded familiar. Then, with a flash of memory, she put a gasping question."He isn't the man who buried another alive?"She was watching the dancing figure making its way towards the flower beds, still throwing the balloon in the air."Yes, it is Monsieur de Malincourt, the man who tried to murder his friend."Betty ran back, paralysed with terror."Oh!" she thought, "I wish Julia would come quickly, or I shall not dare stay here another minute. I am frightened out of my life."To her intense relief Julia appeared, looking quite her old self."Hullo! Betty," she called, "it is nice to see you once more."She surveyed her friend with an approving eye. No trace of rouge or powder marred the now demure face. Betty's hair was much tidier than usual; she wore a well-cut coat and skirt, with a very quiet hat.The girls kissed each other warmly. For a moment the released prisoner stood as if spell-bound, looking out on the world which reclaimed her. A mist veiled her eyes, but they were tears of joy."Betty," she exclaimed as they drove away, "you have changed! I should hardly have known you if you had not written to say you were coming. I wish you could always look like this, it is such a great improvement.""I am glad you think so," said Betty, making a doubtful little grimace. "You see I have taken on a new job. Mr. Reece has engaged me as your companion, he thought you might be dull, and perhaps he knew what a good turn he was doing me. So long as I am in your service I mean to run straight, and try to make you comfortable. You see he wants you to be quite free from worry, I shall really be a kind of superior servant. Nice word that, superior! You don't mind, do you, Julia? You were always such a brick."Julia took the girl's hand and pressed it reassuringly."That was just like Fred," she said. "I expect he guessed I should hate to be alone, for I must never allow myself to think about the past. It hurts me to feel I so misjudged him. Poor fellow, how he must have suffered! Are you sure, Betty, that he quite forgives me? Did he say any hard things about me? I really deserved them."Betty shook her head so vigorously that her hat took a rakish angle, making her look more like her old self."You were not to blame," she replied in a soothing tone. "You had been fretting, I suppose, over the whole thing, and there is no accounting for brain. Once it plays tricks with you, I believe it is a very common phase to take a violent dislike to the person one loves best. You were in a topsy-turvy world, and but for Mr. Reece you wouldn't be here to enjoy the sweets of recovery. He just raved about you the last time I saw him. I don't believe he has had a happy moment since you went away."A look of strange ecstasy came into Julia's eyes."It certainly has been a test of devotion," she replied quietly. "I might easily have killed all his affection, but he has stuck to me through sickness and adversity. No man could have treated his wife better. I shall worship him to the end of my days for getting me out of that place, and I suppose I ought to be equally grateful to him for putting me there."Betty made a sympathetic listener, though all the time her heart was a little bitter, as she thought of the double game Frederick Reece was playing. She had not realised it would be quite so difficult to throw herself into his scheme. Julia's faith in him made Betty despise the man, though she could see no way out of the trouble."I suppose," she thought, "he considers a fool's paradise good enough for a girl like Julia; but I can't help fearing it won't last.""Isn't it nice to see London again?" declared Julia with a deep drawn sigh of content. "I suppose the flat is just the same? I sometimes thought, when flashes of memory came to me, that it would be let to strangers, and I should never see the place again as it was in the happy days.""There are just a few alterations," replied Betty cheerfully. "A nice little room has been fitted up for me; I shan't know myself in such luxurious surroundings. Then there are one or two new pieces of furniture, but I forgot, they were to be a surprise. Mr. Reece will be there to greet you, he could not come himself to fetch you, as he feared it might give rise to talk."Julia was trembling with excitement as she stepped into the lift. She thought the hall porter looked at her a little nervously, and his furtive glance reminded her he was there on the night of her unfortunate attack."I expect he saw me taken away," she thought. "I must have looked dreadful, enough to frighten anybody."The door of the flat stood open. Julia felt under a spell as she walked into the familiar room which looked so much brighter than when she had left it. Every nook and corner was ablaze with flowers; a delicious perfume hung upon the atmosphere, and standing by the window in a ray of sunlight, was the man who could transform the whole world for her.With a cry of delight she ran into his arms, while Betty tactfully closed the door and retired to her own sanctum.Frederick Reece gazed at the flushed face and bright eyes with a thrill of happiness."My darling, you have never looked better in your life. What a resurrection!"He drew her to the sofa, but there was no air of weariness in the alert figure as it sank among the cushions."Fred," she whispered, "are you really the same? Is it possible you love me just as you did before my illness?""No," he replied," not just the same, but a thousand times more. I knew things would come right in the end, I never lost hope even for one moment. You cannot imagine the joy it gives me to hear your voice again and feel you are unchanged. That is the thing which makes all the difference in the world, for heaven knows I have missed you. Now I can feel at peace, for I shall have a haven of refuge here, away from the stress and turmoil of my work-a-day life. Hardly a moment has passed that I have not wanted you. Until our separation I never dreamed a woman could count for so much. I know now that your influence is the Strongest and most beautiful there ever has been or ever can be in my life. You must try to think there can never be anything wrong in our love, because love counts for all, and the rest is immaterial."His words were strangely soothing, and helped Julia to forget that sin must mar the perfection of their union. Still the old pangs of conscience woke at times to fill her with shame and confusion. Generally in the early hours of the morning they were actively alive. She would wake at dawn only to see the ugly side of her life's devotion. The memory of her up-bringing, and the principles which stood for so much before that night of temptation, rushed back with a force that could not be denied. Her better side rebelled against the fate which had overtaken her. Then there was a constant duel between right and wrong."It seems so strange," whispered Julia, " you should have these feelings about me when you know what I am. Sometimes I wonder how I can look into your eyes, and expect to read there the devotion you profess. One would like always to be on a pinnacle, especially in the presence of a lover. Yet you stoop to me in the depths, and try to snake me feel as if I were worthy of your reverence.""Yes," he replied quickly, "that is the right word. Every day I live I learn to reverence you more, with a delight and keenness of feeling only possible perhaps to one who has experienced a great deal of the ugly side of life. Until I met you, women were mere shadows, I played at love, and always ended by finding it a very boring game. As I have often told you before, you never jar on me, or fail to be an ideal and an inspiration. You blame yourself because you are human, but never think, dear, that this detracts from you or mars you in any way. It is the last stroke of the brush which makes you alive, without which you would not be the vivid force that you are. I know you are the one for whom I have always looked but never hoped to find. Is it likely I should let you go? I am so thankful for your presence in my life that my heart simply overflows with gratitude. You have given me a real love, so why mar your glorious gift by condemning it as sinful? We have found what all the world is seeking, it is too good to relinquish."He thought, as he spoke, no code of honour could ever draw him from a heart so full of tenderness. The contrast between his bride's coldness and the yielding grace of Julia Dale, warm with passion and alive in every fibre, seemed to burn into his brain, making this double life an absolute necessity.It mattered little to him that the path must be scattered with lies, he would have trodden the same road, however difficult. His love was all powerful, a deathless instinct which must live on while he drew breath.At last Julia was convinced. She could not doubt his sincerity. Once again she was content, responding in every nerve to his kisses of devotion.Lady Ormsley had stayed indoors that afternoon, but denied herself to visitors. She did not trouble to think where her husband was spending his day; she was only conscious of the fires of rebellion which burnt into her soul, while a desperate longing to tell someone her grudge against the world became an obsession."It is no good," she said to herself, "no one can be trusted. Only fools confide in their friends."She was thinking of a strange conversation she had heard at a dinner party the night before. Two women were talking of Hugh Carlisle, whose story was now common property. She recalled their words, spoken with conviction."Mr. Carlisle," one had said, "is just a walking corpse. He has come back to earth from the grave with his body, but he seems to have left his soul in another sphere. He is denying himself to most of his friends, and has, I believe, become an advanced spiritualist. His old house at Chelsea would be a splendid setting for séances, but he is so reticent, only a very clever person could find out his secrets. This earth is quite complicated enough for me, and since he is a mystic and holds the keys of another world, I would rather be excused from meeting him.""That is just the person I am looking for," thought Lady Ormsley. "I want to get away from myself, to find something new that will distract my thoughts and give me, perhaps, a grain of comfort."She summoned all her courage to beard the man of mystery in his den, trying to invent a plausible excuse for paying him an unconventional visit."If I were only one of those people," she said to herself, "who burst into strangers' houses and worry them for subscriptions, but I could never do that. I should have to be honest and tell him why I had really come. After all, it would not be such a very strange proceeding, since I met his mother shortly before her death. On the ground of a slight friendship with her I might possibly obtain an interview. He would only put it down to American manners."Eva Ormsley was a woman who suddenly made up her mind, and on once arriving at a decision seldom turned back. She ordered her car, and a few minutes later found her driving from Mayfair to Chelsea in search of the unknown.Mrs. Holland was looking out of one of the top windows when the car drew up. She wondered who the stylish lady could be, and if, as usual, the master would be too engaged to receive a visitor.Lady Ormsley had taken the precaution of writing a few words on the back of her card, which she sent in with an air of authority.Hugh Carlisle was alone in the library when it was brought to him. He first looked at the name, remembering Sir Lowther in his bachelor days, then he glanced at the pencilled sentence."May I see you for a few minutes? Please grant me this favour, it is very important."He did not want to be disturbed, but felt a little puzzled and curious. He knew that Lowther Ormsley had married a very beautiful American heiress, and marvelled that a hermit like himself should be favoured by a visit from the bride."Perhaps," he thought, "she does not know how changed I am. She has come to ask me to take part in some social entertainment, or lend my name to one of the many schemes society is always inventing for the good of others."Thoughts of philanthropic committees and charity balls flitted through his mind. Surely his recent bereavement would keep him from such requests, even in these days of short mourning!"Show Lady Ormsley in," he said, laying his books aside, "and bring tea."Eva was the first visitor he had admitted since his return, and she made a striking picture as she entered the library with rather a hesitating air. Very tall, with the extreme elegance of restrained fashion, she seemed to fill the room with her personality. As he came forward to greet her, he was astonished at the look of sadness in those widely opened eyes. It was altogether a wistful face with lips that drooped slightly at the corners. Her pallor almost matched his own, shown up by the dark hair which waved back from her forehead with Madonna-like simplicity. Just the faintest fragrance of perfume hung about her laces, nothing was blatant or overdone. He wondered if her chief attraction lay in this unusual art of restraint."You will think it very strange of me to call on you like this," she said, "but I have the excuse that I knew your mother. Please believe how much I sympathise with you in your loss.""Your presence needs no apology," he replied, drawing a chair forward. "I have known your husband slightly for some years, and since you are thoughtful enough to condole with me, I must not forget to congratulate you."She winced at the words, and now she scrutinised him with eyes that marvelled at his change of appearance. She had seen photographs of Hugh Carlisle in the papers when first his incarceration at Sainte Bruytère thrilled the public. These gave her some idea of his remarkable transformation; her hopes ran high that she would find him different from the ordinary men of earth. It almost seemed possible that he might be in touch with things unseen."I hope," she said, "you will not think I have come here from idle curiosity. You have passed through a terrible experience. It is interesting to see a man who, after hours of mental torment and physical agony, has practically died in a living grave. That gruesome story of Sainte Bruyère slakes you attractive to the public, like a house in which some terrible murder has been committed; it can always draw large crowds to gaze with a morbid fascination on its walls. I can quite understand your wanting to hide away from tactless questioners, and people anxious to know you simply because of your history. I have heard it said that you actually came in contact with the spirit world, and left your soul over the border. Your body is here, but the real you dwells elsewhere. I was told you were an advanced spiritualist. At present life is very difficult for me. I am like a rudderless ship on the rough seas of doubt, I have lost my faith in God, day and night I am chafing against destiny. The spirit of rebellion cannot be quenched. I want something to distract my thoughts, apart from this hateful world, and that is why I ask you to let me share your knowledge. If there is any wizard's work in which you excel, if you can bring me in touch with another form of life which is not altogether cruel and detestable, I shall bless you eternally."For a moment Lady Ormsley had dropped her social mask, giving this stranger a glimpse into her real being. Never had Carlisle heard a more bitter note in a human voice, and some of his own bitterness of soul leapt up to meet her mood in unspoken sympathy. He knew not where her sorrow lay, or why her existence appeared so worthless and unbearable, but he felt sure she was in earnest. No woman acting a part could have betrayed the tame depth of emotion."If I had not ceased to be surprised at anything, your confession would certainly tax my powers of belief. On the surface, you have everything to make you contented and happy. The gods gave you at birth fortune and beauty, and you have married a man who has always been exceedingly popular in society, with an old and honoured name. He would not be human if he failed to treat a woman like yourself with love and respect. Yet you come to me, a man with shattered health and bewildered brain, to ask for some intangible gift. I must confess you shock me when you boldly state I am a spiritualist. I associate the word with concentrated humbug, and the professional séance organised for mercenary purposes, where the manufactured vision materialises in league with the ventriloquised voice. It even conjures up the old table-turning of our childish days. No, Lady Ormsley, I fear I must disappoint you. I am no magician with a panacea for world-weary hearts. I cannot offer you a fresh thrill to distract your mind, though I honestly believe the spirit world is very near us. The inventions of man cannot attract these beings to play to them like puppets, and afford an evening's entertainment. If they appear, they will come of their own accord, they will speak perhaps to the dying soul, or manifest themselves in dreams. I should not care to speak of my experience in the dungeon to an ordinary friend, but you have come to me with such charming frankness and I must be open with you in return. When my body was practically dead I know I came into contact with the one I loved, and since you are a woman of imagination, you can guess it was a rapturous reunion. I am convinced now that love is eternal; no death of the body can separate those who are bound together by this immortal tie."Eva listened with hands clasped and eyes fixed eagerly on the speaker's face. Her breath came in little gasps, it was so good to find herself in the presence of another who spoke without restraint. In this quiet room she regained her own personality, she was no longer acting to a sham world."Love," she said quietly, "makes or mars. It is the real vital force which can destroy or uplift at will. I think it is bound to mellow and improve men, even though it brings them suffering. After a great love disappointment a man is often refined like gold in the fire, but a woman goes under, it shatters her completely. She cannot seek forgetfulness in the same way as a man. The springs of her youth dry up, she is blighted like some frost-bitten flower. Perhaps you will guess I am speaking of myself. Fate dealt me a cruel blow, which has killed all the humanity in me. I can not help sometimes feeling sorry for my husband, though I have not the courage to tell him he is married to a dead woman. It was all a matter of two days. Fancy, two days ruining a whole life!"Hugh Carlisle at last felt thoroughly interested in his unconventional visitor. Here was one who suffered like himself. He had found life's joy, only to lose it within an hour of the discovery. She was also the victim of some malign chance, and very earnestly he asked her whether she would tell him the story of those two days."I cannot see," she replied softly, "how it can interest anyone but myself. Ten years ago, I was twenty then, I fell in love with just the one man. There is always one, whatever happens afterwards. Some people, of course, miss that real love which transforms the whole being; they are content with half measures. It doesn't matter, those who are born blind do not miss the light. The man I loved was married when I met him, tied to a woman who elected to live in another part of the world on the excuse of ill health. He was obliged to stay in England, for he held a high appointment at Court, and for reasons too numerous to mention, he was my ideal of what a man should be. Of course, moralists would say the marriage tie should form a barrier, the very mention of the truth becomes a sin. On the other hand, all sensible people know that love cannot be hidden, it shines out just as the sun bursts from behind a cloud, and penetrates everywhere. In those days I vowed I would never marry anyone else, I lived in the hope he might possibly be freed from the tie which only brought him sorrow. Every year I came to England just to see him, refusing many offers, to the disappointment of my parents who wished me to make a brilliant marriage. I simply lived to meet the one I loved; apart we were miserable, together we were a torment to each other, the suffering was so intense. Each year I thought there could be nothing else to find out, believing that there were always fresh discoveries to bind him closer to my heart. In England your divorce laws are strangely cruel. A man must disgrace himself before he can regain his freedom. In America those two would have severed their unhappy union without a blot on their names. Well, the year came when I was thirty, and thirty is the turning point from youth to middle age. My people were in despair because I had thrown away good chances, and they guessed now I was eating my heart out for a shadow. I imagined the same yearning going on until I was an old woman, and I rather dreaded the thought of dying a spinster. Marriage is such an experience. If Lowther had loved me, deeply, I don't think I could have accepted him, I should have been so afraid of shattering his illusions and spoiling his life. I felt he was the kind of man who had lived hard, frittering away his affections at every turn, till all his freshness of soul became exhausted in the quest. He wanted me because I appeared a suitable partner from a worldly point of view, and I thought with him I might gain the pleasures of companionship, and I always longed to live in England. I believe the arrangement would have answered very well. My married state might have helped me to crave less for the impossible. Then came the blow which broke me down, making my present existence horrible. Two days after my wedding, I read in the morning paper that the woman who stood between me and happiness all those years had died in a foreign country. Had I known this, even as I entered the church, I would have turned back, blessing Providence for making me the happiest being on earth. My selfish happiness would have outweighed any regret for the pain I caused others. At first I felt maddened and blinded by fury. I pretended some awful physical pain had seized me, so that I might throw myself down and cry for hours. I dare not write to the newly-made widower, and though he is in London to-day, I cannot trust myself to see him. If we met it would be the end of all things. Sometimes I feel drawn by a strong magnet. I long to seek him out, or let him come to me, only I know it would be madness. I have spoken of my feelings to no one in the world but you, a stranger. I see no reason why you should ever betray my confidence, for I shall most probably pass out of your life. You are too great a recluse to take any interest in gossip or scandal. Perhaps now you will not think me so childish for wanting to interest myself in something new. From my empty world I turn to the supernatural, and you evidently cannot, or will not help me. I think sometimes the whole scheme of life is a fiendish arrangement to make people miserable. If I were a poor woman and had to work for my living I might learn to forget, there would be some zest then in the mere struggle for existence."As he listened, Carlisle tried to place himself in Eva Ormsley's position, imagining how he would feel if Suzanne had been lost to him in this way. No wonder the burden pressed heavily, especially since she owned to losing her faith in God."Certainly you have a grievance against fate," he said. "I wonder if you would really find consolation in this so-called spiritualism. I am looking for something more tangible, trying to build up for myself a religion, from studying all the different faiths which have moved men and made nations. I keep hoping that some link from the past may open a shutter in my soul which has so long remained dark and musty, perhaps because the religious people of the day are all so cold and unenthusiastic. Religion has ceased entirely to be a passion, to the majority it is merely a pastime. If you were to take up some study it might save you from brooding over your injuries."Eva rose and shook her head."I am past that," she replied. "I have lost the power of concentration. It taxes my wits to appear just an ordinary human being, and hide my misery from prying eyes. Lowther is mystified and a little piqued, but he is by no means broken-hearted. I make no claim upon him, simply letting him go his own way; it is the least I can do."She turned to a pile of books at Carlisle's elbow. They looked very dry to her, but she saw he had marked them freely, making notes on a piece of foolscap."So you really read these?" she declared with a little laugh. "It is a funny medicine for a love-sick man; I suppose that is really your sorrow. You are divided from the one being who could fill your world. It is queer to think how much happiness there must be for the lucky ones.""When I am buried in my studies," he replied, "I often feel that Suzanne's spirit is near me, trying to help me in my search, knowing there must be growth in the desire for knowledge. All this afternoon I have been studying Mithraism, that ancient religion of Persia, the most nearly universal religion during many centuries of the Roman empire. The main feature of this religion was the worship of the sun god, Mithra, the god of the heavenly light.""That sounds rather wonderful," murmured Eva, moved by his enthusiasm. "Somehow, I can imagine worshipping the sun.""It was a sort of free-masonry," declared Carlisle, "never a public organisation, and was suppressed in Rome and Alexandria by physical force about the end of the fourth century, though its usages long survived. It is most interesting to trace how the mystic rites and ceremonies of this solar religion foreshadowed the very kernel of Christian worship. It certainly teaches one to believe in the unity of Human faiths. Mithra, the sun god, occupied, as perhaps you know, the position of a pagan Christ. But I am boring you, I become so part of my books, I forget it may not interest others.""Indeed, I don't know, and it does interest me," said the woman who had drifted so far away from anything spiritual. "Tell me more about Mithra, this God of the sun.""He was represented," replied Carlisle, "as born of a virgin, in a rock cave or mountain stable. He was depicted as surrounded by the twelve signs of the Zodiac, representing the twelve apostles. The higher mysteries of communion, divine service, and resurrection, were all foreshadowed in Mithraism. When the Romans heard the Litany of the holy name of Jesus, the epithets were familiar to them: God of the Skies, Purity of the Eternal Light, King of Glory, Sun of Justice, and Angel of Great Counsel. Apollo was called the Good Shepherd. Mithra carried a lamb on his shoulders, and was a mediator, creator and judge of the dead. Their miza, or sacred cake, was replaced by the Mass, from which the name probably originated. Many other instances occur, such as keeping Sunday, the first day of the week, consecrated to Mithra, the sun god, Christmas, as the solstice, the birthday of the sun god, and Easter, the vernal equinon, the period of his sacrifice and triumph. Thus, Mithraists could turn to Christianity and find its rites little impaired."He paused, afraid he had said too much, though a deep desire possessed him to turn Lady Ormsley's mind into the channels which riveted his own."I see," she said, "why this study interests you, it certainly makes one think. All the foreshadowing is so weird, perhaps we are only advanced pagans after all.""No," he replied quickly. "Tracing things back shakes the faith of some men, but it has helped to strengthen mine. The contemplation of time makes one feel immeasurably small. To ourselves our own feelings are so great and all-important, our trials so gigantic, our love so terrible, our hate so strong. Yet really it is all as a passing moment. I learnt that during my spirit experience; since then I have never felt this world matters at all."The clock struck five and tea was brought in, but Lady Ormsley rose, declaring she must go."I am dining out early to-night," she said, "and have quite a long motor run into the country. On my way I shall think over my strange visit to you, and all the ideas we have exchanged. I told you the tragedy of my life, do you realise you did not even say you were sorry?""I am sorry," he said as he took her hand, "that you are making yourself wretched over what is inevitable. You could take a different view if you chose, yet no one would think you weak-minded."Just for a moment a look of offence clouded her brow, then she laughed, and for the first time he discovered she had a sense of humour."You are rude," she declared, "but I rather like you for it! I believe we shall be friends, and when you come back to the world don't forget I shall expect you to pay me a return visit."He walked with her to the door and stood watching the car as it drove away."If only," he thought, "some higher influence could speak to her, at present her life is just one great clashing discord. She is out of tune with everything that makes for good."On her return Lady Ormsley found a letter from her hostess of that evening."Dear Eva," it ran, "it is very good of you to pilgrimage into the country for our dinner party to-night, I am only so sorry Sir Lowther cannot accompany you. An old friend of yours, Guy Stafford, will be with us, and I thought, perhaps, you would motor him back to town. Our trains are simply wretched, and I know there will be plenty of room in your car."Lady Ormsley did not finish the letter, her fingers stiffened as the sheet fluttered to the ground."Guy Stafford," she gasped. "Oh! God, so it has come at last!"CHAPTER XVIIIWHEN Eva Ormsley reached the Dunmar's house she felt it must be all a dream, no one appeared quite real as she entered the brightly lighted drawing room. A number of guests had already arrived, all strangers to her, except one man who stood over by the window with his back to the door. He evidently did not hear her announced, and she wildly hoped he would not turn until she regained her self control.Mrs. Dunmar greeted her with warm enthusiasm, asking many questions about the honeymoon abroad, and declaring it was too bad of the bridegroom to disappoint them that evening."Of course I can guess the reason," she said. "Sir Lowther could not be bothered to come out of town to dine with people who were only a name to him. That is always the difficulty with newly married couples. The wife has to be bored with sampling her husband's friends, and vice versa."Eva made some banal reply, not caring to own the truth of Mrs. Dunmar's words. As if to torture herself, she had donned her wedding dress, feeling she hated every fold and curve of that disastrous garment.Every one was looking at the beautiful woman in white, naturally interested in this recent society bride, the latest example of the popular Anglo-American alliance. At last Guy Stafford turned; instantly his eyes met those of Lady Ormsley across the intervening space. Though divided by a chattering crowd, that one brief glance was even more eloquent than if they had met alone. It spoke from soul to soul, and though meteor-like in its swiftness, carried the tragic message each knew too well. He did not move to her side at once; perhaps he saw the paling of her features, and the effort it cost her to continue her conversation with Mrs. Dunmar. When at last she found him near her, their hands met in simple greeting; just a few conventional phrases, accompanied by an air of forced aloofness. No one knew what that touch of the hand conveyed. The sudden leaping together of fiery pulses, just as though flame met flame driven by a strong wind.There was a quiet dignity about Guy Stafford. He had never been considered a great admirer of women. During all the years of separation from his wife, he had escaped the lash of scandalous tongues. It was well known he had a great friendship with the much talked of American beauty, who yearly visited London with her parents. The acquaintance was naturally a convenient one for the visitors from Boston. Guy Stafford had been very useful to them socially, and his official position at Court procured them the entrée to many functions they might otherwise have missed. Eva had never worn her heart on her sleeve; now she was determined none should read her secret.Almost immediately a move was made to the dining room, Lady Ormsley being taken down by the host, and Guy Stafford bringing up the rear with Mrs. Dunmar. Eva was glad they were parted at the long table with its lavish floral decorations; but she could not for a moment forget his presence. The line of men and women between her and Guy were like ghosts at a spectral feast. She spoke and moved in an artificial world, knowing that in a few hours she would be alone with the man who outweighed every other consideration in life. Never before had she felt so intensely his dominating influence, it controlled her like some strong hypnotic force, swamping every other thought. The whole world seemed to fade away into a medley of nonentities, yet she knew in her heart these puppets controlled her destiny. Public opinion, the name of Ormsley, which she had taken with every intention of upholding, and filial duty towards the parents whose life interest centred in their only child.Her host was a well read man, bubbling over with information, and he dearly loved an intelligent listener. Eva was clever enough to make him believe she was really interested in all he said, though occasionally the fear seized her she might betray herself by an inapt remark.It seemed an eternity before dinner was over, and the hostess caught her eye. It was almost a relief to get away at last from the man whose glance she had so strenuously avoided.Lady Ormsley moved to a window screened by a long crimson brocade curtain, and drawing it back she stood looking out on the starlit night. It was just in this attitude Guy Stafford found her, the tall white figure making a striking picture against the warm coloured background. It was quite an unconscious pose, since Eva felt that without a breath of the night air she would have suffocated."Perhaps you were surprised to find me here," he said. "Though I feel it is rather hypocritical to pretend to mourn, I have kept away from social functions since my wife's death. I only accepted for this evening because I was told you were coming.""Wasn't that rather cruel of you?" she replied in a whisper. "We were quite near each other in London; if I had wanted to see you, I could have sent for you."He felt that he deserved the rebuke, yet the joy of being close to her compensated for any pangs of conscience."Men are terribly selfish creatures," he said, without an effort to excuse himself. "I knew it would hurt me to see you, but there is no joy without pain, and some people say there is no pain without joy. You are so happy now, it can't matter to you. I only ask for a crumb of your friendship. Look on me, please, as the dog under the table."He really believed her marriage a success, that at last she had forgotten his wild words of love spoken so long ago. Then youth had been their only excuse for such rashness, and year after year a strong friendship masked the real pain at their hearts.Suddenly, as he looked into Eva's eyes, he realised how changed she was. In a flash he saw she rebelled against her fate.Guy Stafford was not a remarkably handsome man, his attraction lay more in manner and expression. Clean shaven, with dark hair, and a thin but upright figure, he looked younger than his years. He might have been eight and twenty, but for the lines about his eyes, and the knowledge his speech betrayed of the world and its affairs.Someone was moving towards the piano, and a moment later an Italian guest, with a voice of haunting sweetness broke into a passionate love song. Eva and Guy remained standing in the window, screened from observation by the half drawn curtain. As the melody drifted out on the still air, both realised that the barrier of her marriage had strengthened rather than changed their feelings for each other."Why can't you be happy?" asked the man, searching her face with an eagerness that needed no concealment. "I thought I was the one to be pitied, for two days divided me from the dream of my life; I little guessed you suffered also. Had I known, I would have kept away. At least believe that, if you can never think well of me again."Eva's head drooped, and a rush of colour crept to cheek and neck."It was just a horrible trick of fate," she said, "and if there is an ultimate purpose in it all, it is remarkably obscure. I suppose it is good for human beings to suffer, and practise the self control necessary to hide one's real feelings, but I am afraid too much adversity might have a bad effect on many natures. There is a point when things get almost beyond bearing. But it must all end somehow; perhaps one gradually shrivels up, until mind and body become incapable of feeling anything at all."The music grew louder. The plaintive voice rang out in a passionate wail, the words of longing seeming like an echo from their own hearts.Eva could trust herself no longer; as the music died away she reappeared among the guests. Guy Stafford remained at the window, feeling he had committed a crime by forcing his presence on one who had ignored him with such studied persistence.Now he knew she was unhappy, he grudged her fiercely to Lowther Ormsley. It maddened him to think that another man possessed the woman whom he could never claim since his freedom had come too late. He had longed for her day and night through many weary years; she had always been so perfect in his eyes. Ever since he knew her, she remained the same image of perfection. Nothing in his life had ever made him so proud as the possession of her friendship, nothing had brought him a happiness to compare with what she had given him. She had helped to make life possible when he chafed under his wife's unnatural behaviour. Man-like it did not worry him that year after year she remained single because of his devotion. He believed things must come right in the end, and when she told him of her engagement, he naturally concluded this meant the death of her old affection."It is so good of you," said Mrs. Dunmar in parting, "to take Mr. Stafford back to town. He tells me he has an appointment early to-morrow morning, or, of course, we should have put him up."Eva's heart beat fiercely as she covered her bridal dress with a long wrap, passing out of the house of her friends, followed by the man who might have been her husband.At first they were silent, for it seemed so wonderful to be alone with a long country drive before them under the moonlit sky. There was magic, in the night, a strange air of enchantment, and but for the sadness in their hearts it would have seemed like some beautiful fairy tale, or dream passage through the realms of fantasy.Guy was so close to her, and now he imprisoned her hand as a drowning man grasps a rock of safety. Two temperaments, in absolute unison, were fighting to build up a barrier because love was sin."Help me," whispered Eva, "not to forget what I owe to Lowther. If he has faults, there are so many in myself I cannot judge. He might have been a good husband if I had cared a little more, but when I knew that you were free, I practically cast him off. It was brutal of me, but I could not help myself. I was never a humbug, and love is too sacred to be played with. I thought I could blot out the past, but it was too full of unforgettable memories of you and your friendship, which has never failed in word, look, or deed, even for a moment. When I was quite a girl, I fancied you were just a passing episode in my life, but year by year your influence grew and strengthened. I did not realise human beings were made like that."Guy Stafford bit his lips and, with a mighty effort at self control, relinquished the trembling hand pressed so fervently in his own."Remember," he said, "I am only a man. You make it very difficult for me not to break through the barriers and forget everything."Sir Lowther Ormsley returned a few moments before his wife's car drew up at the door.As she entered the hall, he noticed a new radiance about her. She appeared alive again, a woman whose blood coursed quickly through her veins. He looked at her curiously; even thus, she was less fair than Julia to the man who was under the spell of an old passion."You have enjoyed yourself," he said in a tone of conviction."Not exactly," replied Eva. "The quiet drive home was really the best part. What have you been doing with yourself, Lowther?""I dined with a friend who has been very ill," he replied."Man or woman?" queried Eva.For a moment he considered whether he should answer her truthfully. Then he replied in a casual tone as he helped himself to a whiskey and soda."A woman, just a little dinner of three. I went to see her out of kindness.""To yourself?" Eva ventured to remark with a whimsical laugh."Possibly. You are quick at guessing! But how did you get on?""The Dunmars were very disappointed you were not with me. They evidently thought it rather strange that I should dine out alone so soon after our return.""I gathered from what you told me they were rather old-fashioned," replied Lowther. "But it is better, isn't it, to start as we mean to go on, and get people used to our ways? I suppose at heart I am a bit of a Bohemian. I like the kind of people one seldom meets in society. Somehow they seem more human than the crowd who spend their lives in dining, dancing, and visiting."It occurred to Eva that if she had grown cold, Lowther had very quickly caught the infection. She compared him with the man from whom she had just parted, whose every fibre was alive with the flame of undying devotion to an ideal. Guy Stafford could not console himself with other loves or meaner friendships. His emotions would burn out with his life. If they could survive the strain of ten years, they must be part of himself and remain for always."Love," she thought, "is a fine art which only a fine nature can understand. Perhaps that is why so many marriages are unhappy. The average man is a mere amateur when first he stumbles on to holy ground. He desecrates the shrine. Instead of raising the woman up, his baser nature lowers her to the earth; women are slow to forgive when the greatest thing in life proves a disappointment."They were passing together up the broad staircase, and Eva leant wearily on the oak balustrade. As she reached the door, she said good-night to Lowther very decidedly."Don't wait for me in the morning," she said. "I shall probably breakfast upstairs."He heard her close and bolt the door, then he felt in his pocket for the latch-key of Julia's flat."I think I will go back, after all," he said to himself. "I only left for Eva's sake. Julia will welcome me, why should I be alone?"CHAPTER XIXPHILIPPA was seated by the open window in her drawing-room, trying to concentrate her thoughts on a piece of embroidery. Every now and then she looked towards a high wall beyond the garden boundary. The gardener had cut away some boughs from a tall chestnut so that she could just see the turrets of an imposing building. Before going to bed she always looked out to try and catch a glimpse by moonlight of the roof which sheltered her husband, and each morning she prayed with her face towards the place where Réné dwelt.To-day she was expecting her sister Brenda, and though they had little in common, the ties of blood were strong. Philippa loved her sister chiefly from a sense of duty. She tried to believe that Brenda's visit must be a source of pleasure.Mrs. Williams was an inherent grumbler, and one of her chief grievances lay in the fact that her daughters had not married. She failed to understand why such well educated girls did not attract the sterner sex."It isn't as if they were plain," she had often said. "Mabel has a very good figure and quite a sweet expression, while Sybil's complexion is unusually dazzling. If she were not so immaculately brought up, one might almost suspect her of powder and paint."To-day, however, the moment Brenda entered the room Philippa noticed a change in her manner. She was palpably excited, and almost immediately burst out with the piece of news uppermost in her mind."Mabel," she said proudly, "has met her fate at last. She is twenty-eight and must be old enough to know her own mind. He is a barrister and well off, so you can imagine we are all delighted to see her happy."Philippa felt glad to hear of the engagement, for it was quite a change to see her sister in good spirits."I knew," said the mother in a tone of elation, "that Mabel would do well in the end. She has always behaved so differently from other girls, never flirting or running after men. I have impressed upon my daughters that reticence is the most attractive feature in young unmarried girls. I wouldn't allow them, as you know, to correspond with men, or go about unchaperoned in the dreadful modern way. They used to complain that I was too severe, but doubtless at heart Mabel is grateful to me now. She is coming to see you this afternoon, and ought to be here directly. She wanted to tell you the news herself, but my head was so full of it I could not resist depriving her of that pleasure."Philippa was amused at Brenda's air of triumph. Evidently she had despaired of Mabel, to appear so obviously relieved at the presence of a suitor."Of course," said Philippa, "you and I had very different ideas on the up-bringing of children. I believe in letting young people develop their own personalities, and I often remonstrated with you on what I called the crushing system. Perhaps as they grew older you slackened the reins a little, and relinquished your vigil."Brenda shook her head."No, indeed," she said quickly. "I have kept my girls so safely under my wing, that they are as simple now as when I first launched them on society in their teens. I have carefully excluded all pernicious literature from our house and I never let them see a play unless I knew first that it was entirely free from the sex question. Their friends have been selected by me, and though they sometimes made a grievance of this, they will realise some day that I was right."Philippa listened with a sense of hopelessness. Since her own troubles she had certainly become broader minded. Instinctively her eyes travelled to the painting of Suzanne which hung over the mantel piece, the picture she banished to the box room during the early days of her bereavement. Then she could not bear to look at those laughing lips and sparkling eyes; they were too life-like when she could only see before her the image of a dead face. Lately she had brought out many of Suzanne's hidden treasures, so that the room seemed full of her influence. Portraits dating from earliest childhood showed that her mother grieved now in a different way, she could even bear to speak of her dear one to almost strangers."How is Réné?" asked Brenda, adopting a doleful voice. She always spoke of her brother-in-law in an undertone, as if it were a crime to mention his name."He is just the same," Philippa replied. "I am so thankful that he seems to enjoy my daily visits. I am getting a new motor car, for the doctor says I may sometimes take him for a drive, with his attendant of course.""That is very daring of you," said Brenda, shuddering. "Really, Philippa, since your second great trouble, you have come out in quite a new light. I had no idea you were so strong minded. How is it you have changed from the timid creature you were, to the woman whose energy and promptitude saved Mr. Carlisle's life? I have often wondered why you went to Paris just at the right moment. You never lost your head; you behaved in fact just as I should have done, the strong minded member of the family."Philippa thought for a moment whether she should tell Brenda of the revelation which had altered her life."I take no credit to myself," she replied in rather a far-away tone. "At that time I was guided by some outside power, I obeyed a voice, in fact I did as I was told. Of course I know now that I was used as an instrument, and some supernatural force was at work. In Suzanne's lifetime I lived to make her happy in this world, my husband and I were not at all spiritual. Only since she left us and the hard frozen feeling at my heart died away, have I realised that this life is not everything. Sometimes I think my child is nearer to me now than when I could hold her in my arms. Then we were often separated, the pleasures of the world took her away from me, at last I have a strange feeling that she is all my own."Philippa's eyes were those of a dreamer. To Brenda there was something uncanny in the light of peaceful content which had suddenly come into her face. Here was a woman who had lost everything, husband and child, yet she could speak of both without a touch of bitterness. Certainly this lonely life outside the gates of the asylum had brought forth mysterious fruit."I suppose," said Brenda, "it is some consolation to you seeing Réné every day. Although he does not know you are his wife, he evidently appreciates your visits. Even that poor crumb of comfort counts for something.""Yes," Philippa replied. "To me it is just a little better than the terrible finality of death."Brenda rose, for she felt out of tune with her sister's mood, and was anxious to curtail her visit."I have another call to pay," she said. "I will go now and come back later on to fetch Mabel. I expect she will arrive in a few minutes, and you will hear a great account of her beloved Reginald's charms."Philippa liked the idea of seeing Mabel alone, she always preferred her nieces away from their mother. They were overshadowed by the older woman, and seemed half afraid to speak in her presence. Apart from her there was some slight effort at expansion, which Philippa fostered and tried to draw out.The moment Mabel burst in, her aunt discerned a subtle change both in manner and appearance. Though not as radiant as her mother, there was a look of quiet satisfaction about the girl which took away the old awkwardness, making her more human."Do tell me all about it," said Philippa enthusiastically. "When did he propose, and has it been going on long? I do hope you are very much in love."Mabel drew her chair close to Philippa and stroked the thin hand with a new and sympathetic tenderness."I am so glad," said the girl, "that I can talk to you alone. Do you know that for years I have been a kind of machine tutored as to what I should say, do and feel. I was brought up to look upon men as monsters waiting to devour the innocent. Both Sybil and I steeled ourselves with a perfect armour of mother's maxims. 'Never let a man think you are fond of him,' was one of our earliest lessons. 'Be very dignified,' was another, and 'if he makes any advances, show him you are not a flirt. It is humiliating to be too easily won.' I daresay you know the rest, she has aired them all for your benefit. It was only the other day I suddenly began to wonder if she were really right. The girls whom mother called 'go-head' all seemed marrying off, and I noticed they made admirable wives and mothers. Sybil and I grew quite accustomed to being ignored, but we didn't like it for all that. Mother hated us to go to dances unless she were resent to watch us through the entire evening as a cat watches a mouse. It happened one night she had a bad headache, and I was allowed to go to a ball chaperoned by a trusted friend. Reginald was there, and I boldly determined to throw all the old teaching aside and try to be myself. He contrasted my manner to him with my stiffness towards other men on previous occasions; I suppose he was a little flattered. Between the dances I went out into the garden, a thing I never did before, mother always told us to avoid dark corners and unlighted paths. He took my hand and instead of drawing it away I just forced myself to behave in a manner which to me seemed desperately wicked. I let him hold it for a long time in silence, then suddenly his arms stole round me and I felt his lips upon my cheek. It never crossed my mind for a moment he was in earnest, but I determined I would have the experience. Though I was awfully ashamed I let him kiss me again and again; it was a sort of vengeance on mother after years of suppression. Then the wonderful thing happened, he asked me to be his wife, the first proposal I had ever received. He has told me since that if I had drawn away when he touched my hand, it would have been a sign that I did not care. How small a thing can wreck a life's happiness! Certainly girls are in a difficult position. They may become the plaything of a fast man, or win a good husband by one and the same action. I think perhaps it is better to risk something and be loved, than live all your life in an ice house. I have told Sybil exactly what happened, and though it rather shocked her, I shouldn't be surprised if she is engaged soon."Philippa could not help laughing at Brenda's and Mabel's contradictory accounts. The mother thought her strict up-bringing had won a good husband for Mabel, while in truth the very defiance of it decided the daughter's fate.Mrs. Williams returned for tea, and talked so rapidly that Philippa had quite a headache by the time she left.Mabel ran back after she had said good-bye, to whisper a last word in her aunt's car."You will never repeat what I told you to-day," she said."Mother is so delighted about it all, I would not spoil her pleasure for the world."As Philippa reassured the girl, Mrs. Williams returned, beckoning her daughter to come quickly."Mabel," she said, "I want to get away. A motor has just drawn up at the door with Mr. Carlisle. He looks dreadfully changed, just like a ghost. I couldn't bear to meet him for I have never spoken to him since his troubles. No wonder he comes to see you, Philippa, for he owes you his life."Madame de Malincourt turned a little paler; the thought of meeting Hugh Carlisle was an ordeal. Although they had exchanged several letters, her last sight of him had been at Sainte Bruyère, lying unconscious in a hired motor.As he entered the house he passed Mrs. Williams and her daughter in the hall. The sight of them brought sharply back the memory of that never to be forgotten ball. No word was exchanged, merely a bow of recognition, and despite all that had occurred he felt instinctively Mrs. Williams could not forgive.Philippa expected to see a changed man, yet the alteration in Hugh Carlisle's appearance was more startling than she anticipated."I have been meaning to come and see you every day since my return," he said, retaining her hand for a moment in a clasp which was strangely cold. There seemed to be no life in his body, the lips were white like the features which blended with his snowy hair. "I heard from Dr. Giraudet this morning, and he begged to be specially remembered to you."The sight of Philippa brought Carlisle more in touch with his old life, stirring memories in his heart, making it seem at any moment Suzanne must enter the room."I never thought that you would pilgrimage out here," Philippa replied. "Had I known, I should have begged you not to trouble, for I fear it must be a strain on you after your terrible illness. When I think of the sorrow my dear ones have brought into your life, it makes me feel dreadfully guilty. I am only thankful that it was through me you were saved. It seems like repaying a little of the debt we owe you."For a moment he felt inclined to tell her how bitter the return had been, but he checked himself, fearing the words might sound churlish. Why deny this sad heart its one little ray of comfort? He would let her think he was grateful, and forced some kindly words, at enmity with his true feelings.Of course they talked of Suzanne, it was impossible to keep off the subject. Her picture was beaming down on them as if dominating the room, and strangely enough they found themselves talking of her almost as if she were alive."One would like to think," said Philippa, "that those who leave this world go straight to Heaven and are at rest. I don't know if it is on account of her youth, but I cannot feel my little Suzanne has really left the earth. One day I am certain she came to me when I was with her father. She seemed to walk by my side on the way home. Ever since, her influence has hovered about this place, created perhaps by my own thoughts. You told me in one of your letters that she came to you in the dungeon at Sainte Bruyère. I wonder if you have experienced any of the feelings since then which bring me such comfort. She seems far nearer to me now than when I could actually look on her features in that last long sleep. Perhaps it is only a merciful trick of the mind, sent by Providence to save me from despair."Carlisle was longing to tell the story of the children in the garden. Had he mentioned it to any other friend, he knew his words would have been ridiculed; but Madame de Malincourt might believe, even as he believed.Philippa saw the strange yearning look which came into his eyes. There was certainly an uncanny air about him; he was like an apparition which might fade away at any moment."If there are such things as spirits," he said, "and I do not doubt it for a moment, their ways are utterly inexplicable. I believe the heart must be tuned aright to feel their influence, and only the very pure can ever see them on this side of the border. Children, for instance, are sometimes favoured in a way which makes older people envious."Philippa leaned forward with hands clasped, a look of deep interest on her face. No word could have drawn him to confidence like the longing in her eyes when he mentioned spirit manifestations. Suddenly he found himself in tune with the woman who had borne Suzanne. He described exactly what had occurred in the old Chelsea garden, especially dwelling upon the little girl Jenny who declared that Suzanne kissed her on the forehead.Philippa appeared strangely moved. Though her eyes filled with tears, there was an air of happiness about her as if she held some beautiful secret hidden from the man."Of course Suzanne was there," she said with conviction. "How could they have recognised the photograph unless they had really seen her face? We know nothing of the life beyond; it is presumptuous to say that such things cannot be. Oh! I am so glad you told me. They said she smiled and laughed at them, so she must be happy. Now I have a favour to ask, and I shall never rest until it is granted. You must let me see the little girl who felt my darling's kiss. I would like to show her my pictures of Suzanne, to let her think that her spirit playmate was still alive, it would be wonderful to hear her talk of an experience which evidently did not seem at all strange or unnatural to her young mind.""Yes," murmured Hugh Carlisle, "Jenny would undoubtedly interest you, she is so quaint and old-fashioned. She is staying with my housekeeper, and I often watch her in the garden where she spends a great deal of her time. Poor little soul, she always looks for a playmate who never comes, and she tells me now she is quite sure the white lady does not mean to return. She often dreams of her, and seems to think more of her than of the baby sister and older brother whom she has left in the City. I thought a drive would do her good, so I brought her with me in the motor; she is outside, if you would like her to come in."Philippa sprang to her feet, overjoyed at the news. Carlisle noticed with satisfaction the eagerness with which she ran to the door in search of the child. He watched her lift Jenny down from the car with such tenderness she might have been her own."I have some pictures to show you," she said. "You must tell me if the face reminds you of any one you have seen before."Jenny, who never suffered from shyness, came smiling into the room and instantly looked up at the large painting of Suzanne. She waved her thin little hand in its direction as if greeting a friend. Then she went close to the fire-place and standing on her toes tried to examine it more closely."How did she come here?" asked the childish voice. "Do you know her too?"The wistful grey eyes were full of enquiry as they searched Madame de Malincourt's face."She is my little girl," replied a broken voice, "but she cannot come to see me because she is far away. When she played with you it was only for a short time. You could not keep her there, she left you just when you wanted her most. That's what she did to me, and I want her every moment of the day and night."Jenny's face filled with sympathy. She moved nearer to the woman in the black dress and put her thin arms round Philippa's waist."Why does she do it?" asked the child softly. "Doesn't she like us?"Philippa could not answer, she felt she wanted to be alone with Jenny, Carlisle's presence became a restraint.Suddenly she turned to him with a look of entreaty."You must let Jenny stay with me to-night," she said. "I am sure your housekeeper will not mind. Say she is doing a good work, cheering up a very lonely soul. Would you be frightened to remain with me, little one? I will show you some of the toys Suzanne used to play with, and perhaps we shall both dream of her, and she will be nearer to me because you are here."Carlisle felt he was no longer wanted, the woman and child were absorbed in one another. Jenny wanted to hear more of the white lady. Seeing the room so full of Suzanne's portraits gave the child immediate confidence in Philippa."Anything you wish," he replied. "I will make it all right with Mrs. Holland, and send her to fetch Jenny tomorrow."He drank the cup of tea Philippa pressed upon him, but even the dainty cakes did not appear to fascinate Jenny, who preferred to wander round the room examining the pictures of her lost playmate.As he drove away, Carlisle noticed the great iron gates and long winding drive which led to the asylum where Réné passed his days. He would like to have gone in, for a morbid wish seized him to look on his would-be murderer, but remembering Dr. Giraudet's instructions, he overcame the desire."I do not think," he said to himself, "that the sight of de Malincourt could affect my health in any way, but I might do the poor fellow some harm. Was he mad, I wonder, when he planned my death, or did his reason desert him afterwards? That must be left for the judgment Day."Philippa had intended to visit her husband after tea, but for the first time she neglected this duty, jenny so enthralled her, she felt she could not leave the child for a moment."Do you like staying at Chelsea?" she asked when Carlisle had gone.Jenny gave an emphatic nod."I like it because the white lady came there," she said. "Baby thought she was a fairy, so we called the garden fairy ground.""But don't you miss your mother?" continued Philippa, wondering why the thin face had such a strange look of weariness. "I expect you love her very much."Jenny hesitated before replying. She was sitting far back in a deep arm chair swinging her legs, and enjoying the comfort of a large satin pillow."She told me I was to say I did. If you are told to say a thing, you must, mustn't you?"Philippa felt her heart ache for the child who had so unconsciously betrayed a painful fact."I am sorry I asked," she said stroking the fair hair which hung to the child's waist. "What is your mother like? Does she work you very hard when you are at home?"Jenny had no scruples in talking of her past."You see it's like this," she said. "Alfred is the favourite because he is a boy, and then he's the eldest, that makes a difference. Mother says she didn't want a couple of girls, but really she is rather fond of baby.""And not of you?" queried Philippa, trying to make it sound quite a natural question,"No, perhaps not of me," Jenny said practically. "You see I'm not the eldest or the youngest, I'm just between. I wonder what baby will do now I am away, when father and mother go to the music hall. They often spend the evening out, and sometimes they take Alfred with them if he is good. Then I take care of the house and get supper ready."Jenny's words unconsciously revealed the loveless condition of her life. Not only her body was so wasted and thin; Philippa felt the little unseen soul was starved as well. Just at that moment the woman's eyes travelled, as they often did, towards Suzanne's portrait. The bright light from the setting sun fell full across the face, and she could almost imagine the eyes and lips moved. They seemed to bring her a message, as though the words were spoken in her ear. She fancied Suzanne was telling her to take this child to her heart, this child who had seen the spirit form and felt the cold kiss of lips invisible to older eyes. That dream or fancy had in some way consecrated Jenny, making her seem part of Philippa. She said nothing of this sudden whim, the desire to have something to guard and rear, but she put her arms round Jenny and drew her closer."I love you," she said, "because you played with my little Suzanne. She did not come back to you for nothing, and, look, she is smiling down on us now. Don't you think the picture smiles, Jenny?"Jenny leaned forward and peered at the painting with eyes determined not to be deceived."Yes," she said decidedly, "I think she is glad we are together. I do wish I had a mother like you!"Philippa's mind travelled on. Already she was thinking how she could mould a child like this, whose life had commenced in such dreary surroundings. Jenny had not been reared like Suzanne amid the soft things of life. Beneath the childish exterior there was a strong and perhaps noble character, one which would develop in an atmosphere of affection. Mentally Philippa spoke to the pictured face from which the sunlight gradually faded."I will do as you tell me, Suzanne, if it is possible. I feel you have sent her to me, perhaps I can take jenny to my heart, if they will give her up, and let me keep her as my own child.""Come and look at the sunset," she said aloud, drawing her little visitor to the window and gazing at the distant glory of the dying day."It was all gold, just like that, the day we went to play in the Chelsea garden," said jenny leaning confidently against Philippa, to whom she had taken an enormous fancy. "I don't know which afternoon was the best. The lady in white was very beautiful, but really you are nicer because you don't run away. I am so glad I am going to stay here till to-morrow.""I wish it could be for always," said Philippa, catching her breath with sudden anxiety to hear the child's answer."Yes, that's what I wish, too," replied Jenny, with very real enthusiasm. "I should like never to have to go away, you are so kind."Philippa kissed the upturned face."Perhaps," she murmured, "your wish might come true."Jenny shook her head."Oh! no, that only happens in fairy tales, then there are always three wishes. I should wish to see the pretty lady again, and I should wish to stay with you. The third wish would be for Mr. Carlisle. My aunt says he is very sad, and I should wish for him to be happy.""You don't seem to quite believe in fairies, that is rather a pity. I can't help thinking they brought you here, and you will never have to go back to the City. Alfred and baby could come and see you; that would be much nicer, wouldn't it?"Jenny quite thought Madame de Malincourt was leading her into the realms of make-believe, and now she laughed lightly as she ran down the steps to the garden, drawing Philippa after her."Let us look for fairies in the flowers," she said. "Of course I will try and believe in them if you like."Philippa suddenly realised the youthful brain was more advanced than she had guessed."No," she said regretting her words. "You mustn't believe in things just to please me. Have you ever thought, Jenny, about the unseen people who are even better than fairies, because they really exist?""Do you mean the angels?" asked the child with an earnest air Philippa had not seen on her face before. "Sometimes I think the pretty lady has gone to them in Heaven.""Yes, or she would not have left you," said Philippa. "I knew that, and I wanted you to know it too. I expect the angels love her, and won't let her come back to us. We mustn't grudge her to them, we mustn't be selfish, Jenny."They were wandering hand in hand under an arch-way of roses, when a sudden cool breath of air stirred the leaves.Suzanne and Velvein were looking down with happy eyes on the moving figures."We have brought them together, haven't we?" said Suzanne to her guide."Not entirely," he replied, "it was the Eternal Father's loving thought for one who was desolate and alone. Storm and pitiless rain pass away; now there are signs of blue sky on your mother's horizon. She hears in her heart the whisper of hope. A little life has crossed hers which can make things much brighter. In Jenny's small soul there is the germ of true womanhood, the child will not grow up as a useless weed in the flower garden of the world.""Velvein, you were thinking of me," said Suzanne as they drifted away. "I was a weed, perhaps that was why the gardener removed me.""He did not throw you away," replied the man at her side. "Soon all the dross of earth will be lost to memory, and you will hear the glorious harmony of the Heavens. Many die young having accomplished their life's work. You might have been fit to fly across the gulf, for even little children can do that when they have not lost their truer selves. Every day you feel a fresh fund of unselfish love and sympathy for others, and so your spirit life is growing in height. In the past you were utterly superficial, you had no real depth or breadth. Each fresh sorrow, seen with me, strengthens your wings and purifies you. I told you when you went to play with the children you should witness some of the joys. To-night there is joy in that garden, your mother is comforted by the touch of a human hand.""She is so far away from me now," murmured Suzanne as they mounted up towards the distant gold."What can you hear?" asked Velvein."Just the faintest strain of music, such exquisite music, but very far away," she replied."The first faint call," he murmured, "to the earth-bound soul. Those who follow what is noblest and best can hear it all their lives. Only the strongholds of sin bind the prisoner and deafen his ears. God is in Heaven, yet the world forgets. The angels try to speak, but even their voices cannot penetrate the maze of error, or kindle the torch of truth in rebellious hearts. False prophets lead men away from the treasure house of their own souls, to seek peace outside, and hug the canker of external things. The soul of man is insulted, trampled under foot, tyrannised over by the body which must decay. Suzanne, how many free beautiful lives have you seen since you watched the world at my side? All are stamped by some malady and festering sore, and since the injustice of man is great, the true are made to suffer for the false, and the saint has no city in which to abide. All are crucified like their Saviour.""Yet there is love down there in the world," said Suzanne."Human love which the angels have missed," sighed Velvein. "We cannot grudge it to mortals since their lot is so hard. It increases their sorrows, and adds to their sins, but it brings the world a little nearer Heaven when the flame is kindled by eternal fire.""Before I cross the gulf," she pleaded, "show me an earthly love without sorrow.""There is none, "he answered in a tone of finality. "Love and sorrow mingled must pass the gate of death hand in hand."CHAPTER XX"I AM at home to no one this afternoon but Mr. Stafford," said Lady Ormsley, as she entered her boudoir and closed the door.There was a smile on the footman's face as he walked away to repeat his orders to the butler.As usual Sir Lowther was out; he now spent so little time at home that his absence was accepted without comment. The private life of the newly-married couple was practically one of separation.Eva's boudoir seemed in some subtle way to express herself. The decoration was restrained yet harmonious, in keeping with her dress, there was nothing obvious or blatant. Yet everything pleased, the blending of colours, the faint fragrance and careful choice of flowers. It was a place set apart for herself, in which no taste but her own had been consulted, and as Guy Stafford was announced he felt the room was full of. Eva's individuality.He took both her hands in his, and for a moment dared not trust himself to meet her eyes."Why did you send for me?" he asked, and now he was looking at the pale face and trembling lips with an expression of surprise. He could not understand, if it hurt her to see him, why she had sent those few words of frantic appeal after nearly a fortnight of silence."I felt I couldn't go on," she murmured, "without saying a last word of good-bye. When we live so near each other good-bye sounds foolish, doesn't it? Why, sometimes I pass your house twice a day, and I look up at the windows wondering if you feel my thoughts. I send you a message, but it isn't enough. I wanted to see you face to face, lest you should think I had failed in friendship, and my apparent coldness meant I was resigned to my lot. Things are impossible here, every day Lowther and I drift further apart. I have never in the whole of my life been so terribly lonely."As he listened, the man knew if his suffering had been severe, her's was equally acute. They were like two starved souls, both crying for the bread withheld by the malignant powers of fate."I have asked myself a thousand times," he said, "which is the worst of the two evils. God knows we suffer when we meet, the strain is heavy and the pain perhaps increases. But apart, there is the ceaseless ache or the horrible numbness. Life seems so full for everyone else, but just because we cannot be together, all the beautiful things for us are lost. The world grows empty, which could hold so much that is good. How will it all end? What can I do to make you forget? We have tried silence and look at the result. You are worn to a shadow, when I came into the room just now the sight of you frightened me. Your husband must be blind if he does not see the change."Eva sank wearily on the sofa, though now her eyes wore that strangely elated expression, which only the presence of Guy Stafford could kindle."Lowther thinks there is something wrong, but he imagines I have taken an unreasonable dislike to him. His pride is wounded and he never questions me on my coldness. But wounded pride cannot hurt like wounded love, for I notice he is quite happy. Of course, I do not blame him, it is natural he should seek a more congenial companion. I don't know who she is, but I know she exists, and it doesn't interest me to try and find out. Lowther and I are like two dead people chained together, and his nature is one which particularly requires response. He is really very conceited, I discovered that when first he made demands on my affection. He has always been able to win admiration from women, and he could not live without it. He is so indifferent to me that now I have even ceased to puzzle him. Sometimes I wonder if I can go on living this lonely life through all the best years of my womanhood."Guy Stafford's hands were clenched and his face wore a look of deep resolution."Eva," he said, "if you only knew how it hurts me to hear you talk like this! I feel as if you were a prisoner whom I could release, yet petty conventionality tells me you must remain in bondage to the end of your days. Don't you know I am ready to relinquish everything for your sake? My career means nothing to me now; for years I have been simply a machine, working because idle hours made me long more desperately for you. The world is wide and we only want each other. Think for a moment, would it be possible? Have you the courage to put your hands in mine and trust yourself to me? What is the world doing for us? Does its approval bring one grain of comfort?"He breathed the words in an urgent undertone, and for a moment Eva turned dizzy as she pictured this way of escape. Then she raised her head a little proudly and looked him full. in the face."Do you imagine I have not thought of it, too?" she asked in a rather dreamy tone, for suddenly none of her surroundings held the substance of reality. "It is all so different for a man, you might have much to lose, but a woman who sins pays a heavier toll. We take our good names now as a matter of course, the world is nothing to us because we seem to hold it in the hollow of our hands, and nobody values what is easily won. By the time the divorce court has dragged our reputations through the mire, would it be possible for us to love with the same depth of feeling, or should we be contaminated by a sense of burning shame? If Heaven had meant us for each other, those two days would not have robbed us of a perfect life. To make our own destiny and seize happiness would be like cheating God. I have often heard my poorer friends say that the world's gifts are unequally divided. They cannot understand why I should be so favoured, why fortune smiled on me and apparently overlooked them. Perhaps they wouldn't be so envious if they could take one glance into my heart.""Don't you think," whispered the man, "that God must make allowance for love like ours? Is the soul to be crushed and stunted because the body is lawfully bound?"Eva drew away, pressing her hands to her flushing cheeks while her breath came quickly."People always bring God into it," she said, "as a kind of cloak for what is really dark and sinful. They seek to kill conscience, to sacrifice their moral sense under the plea that divinity sanctions the breaking of human laws."A great battle was raging in her heart, a duel between right and wrong, the flesh and the devil, against purity and right. She saw the suffering in the man's eyes, how he winced at her words, cut to the quick as if she had struck him with a knife, and in a moment all that was tender in her woman's nature yearned to console him and soften the blow.She stretched out her arms with a little cry. Her moral defence sounded weak when feelings tore at her heart and unbalanced her reason. In theory she was strong, but in practice there was something deeper to war against than theory, the crying out of human passion, a yearning for the touch of the one she loved.Guy Stafford caught her in his arms, as if he would hold her back from a dark abyss of suffering."We could bear everything together," he whispered in her ear. "The greater the suffering, the closer the tie. Surely we could smile at scandalous tongues, for, at least, our love would be open and honest, acknowledged before the world. There are endless women in London today, leaders of Society, who would point the finger of scorn at you, knowing their own lives were a thousand times more vile. Many in your place would not hesitate to lead a double life. I often wonder what a woman must feel who bears her husband's name and lives beneath his roof, knowing she belongs to another man, revelling in the sweets of a secret love. That is shame, if you like, a hidden canker which must mar and destroy the soul. We would make no pretences, and surely your husband would do the one thing possible; in less than a year you would be free. The life you are living now is hardly fair to him. He is married and not married. In fact three lives are ruined; rather a useless sacrifice surely, if you look the matter squarely in the face."Eva was dashing the tears from her eyes, and now the tortured mind groped its way into fresh channels."Suppose," she said, "I took Lowther into my confidence and told him everything. I called him conceited just now, perhaps it would comfort him to know it was not his fault that I changed so suddenly. Of course, I am standing in his light. If he were rid of me, he might marry some good woman who would fill his life and snake his home happy. I have defrauded him, placed him in a false position. I will offer him reparation and see if he accepts it at my hands. I am not really afraid of the world, Guy, I am more afraid of the after life. Only the other day I told Mr. Carlisle I had lost my faith, that all my religious sense was dead, but I don't think that was really true. I shouldn't have a conscience if the spiritual side of me no longer existed."Guy Stafford's eyes brightened, for he saw light ahead At last Eva's thoughts were growing more tuned to his own, she could think of their future together without the look of horror he had watched for in trembling silence."To me," he replied, "it is impossible to think we should lose Heaven because of our love. If suffering must come, the price will be paid here, I feel convinced of that. It is terrible that you should face the ordeal of such a scene with your husband. Let me see him, and make a clean breast of everything."She knew the speaker had no fear, that he wanted to save her unnecessary pain by taking the burden of confession upon himself.She shook her head."No," she replied, "I am not such a coward. After all I belong to Lowther, it is for me to tell him the kind of woman he has married. I couldn't do it if I thought he cared. If he loved me, however great the pain, I would remain at his side to my flying day. I wouldn't cast him off and leave him to suffer, that would be diabolical and inhuman. I have just a faint suspicion he will be rather glad. My parents are the two I tremble for, my life means so much to them. Fortunately they are returning to America, where we look on divorce in a different light. They know quite well I am not happy, and if they love, as I know they do, surely in time they will recognise that occasionally people have to make their own destiny without even consulting their nearest and dearest."The clock struck as she spoke, and Eva looked up with a strange expression."How quickly," she said, "the whole train of one's ideas can change! Half an hour ago I had made up my mind to see you for the last time. I told myself a woman was not worth her salt until she had been tempted, and could rise above temptation to the heights of martyrdom. In this short time you have shown me that you are really part of myself, that the past ten years count for so much they outweigh my brief married life. I cannot help thinking Lowther will understand, for sometimes he has looked so joyous as he left the house. It is really very sensible of him not to pine and fret after his recent failure. I admire him for his plucky spirit; some men would have taken it so differently.""It only shows he doesn't care," said Stafford, wondering that any man could be unmoved in her presence. He knew, though he would not tell her, the reputation Sir Lowther had borne in his bachelor days. It was easy to guess he had returned to the old life. That Eva should even dwell under his roof seemed to Guy like the defiling of some holy shrine. Never had he worshipped her more fervently than now, as she contemplated making this supreme surrender, sacrificing all on the altar of their love."When will you speak to him?" he asked eagerly. "Every hour you put it off makes the task more difficult. Won't you do it to-night? Darling, if only I could help you! Perhaps you had better save yourself a scene, write a letter. Yes, why not put it in writing?""That is the usual way," replied Eva, as she rose and moved slowly up and down the room with restless tread. "I would rather speak to him and watch his face, it will tell me so much. He will be coming in to dress for dinner, we are dining-out to-night, separately, of course. I will postpone my engagement and plead a headache, but before he goes I shall brace myself to the ordeal.""Suppose the thought of losing you fills him with terror!" said Guy, instinctively dreading what Lowther might do. "If he implores you to change your mind, hurls at you words which burn into your soul and turn you against me, could you still remain firm, I wonder?"Eva leant her elbows on the mantelpiece and buried her face in her hands."It all depends," she said. "I told you just now that he wouldn't suffer, perhaps I was wrong. You know, Guy, I haven't given you my word, I haven't promised to do this thing."In a moment he was at her side. Now he held her again with that firm strong touch which set her pulses beating and made her feel his power."You are tormenting yourself with every kind of doubt," he said, "but you know, in the end we must belong to each other. It is inevitable. Before I go, make that promise, give me the word which I know will not be broken. I can't endure suspense any longer. When hope comes and happiness is almost within one's reach, patience somehow takes to itself wings. I know you are not playing with me, yet I tremble for the future. Your husband may make a desperate effort to save his name, and hold you back against all the promptings of your heart."Eva pushed him from her, though she longed to set his fears at rest."I can only fight for freedom," she replied. "I will tell Lowther tonight. Come back at nine o'clock, then I will give you your answer—yes, or no."Three hours to wait!" he murmured, "before I hear the verdict—life or death."She bowed her head, adding softly:"Perhaps it will be life, Lowther must decide."CHAPTER XXISIR LOWTHER had been spending the afternoon with Julia, and was returning that night to take her to a theatre. Betty made an excellent chaperon, and was always conveniently engaged when Julia expected her lover. Today, as he left the building, he met Miss Brown looking the picture of propriety."Hullo!" she said, her face dimpling into smiles, "I have been out marketing. You would be quite surprised what a good housekeeper I make."Certainly the change had worked wonders, for Betty's face looked almost plump, and her eyes had lost some of that world-tired expression which gave them before such a pitiful look of tragedy."I want to talk to you," said Sir Lowther. "If you are not too tired, walk a little way with me."Betty gave her parcels to the lift-man, delighted to seize this opportunity of a few quiet words with the so-called Frederick Reece."Julia is splendid, isn't she? She does us both credit. I never thought she could be so happy again. It is a marvel to me how you can turn up so often and be so attentive, with a wife at home who must feel herself somewhat neglected.""Yes," he replied, "I daresay it is rather a puzzle to you. It seems I am not missed in that quarter, but Julia would pine if I left her for long. Have you noticed how her mind has developed lately? She reads serious books, and takes a really deep interest in them. I am rather amused at her visits to the East End, she is always wanting money for special cases; I am only too glad she has something to occupy her mind. I suppose you haven't traced any signs of suspicion? That is the only thing I fear, some day she may take it into her head to find out more about my life."Betty banished his alarm with a reassuring nod."That isn't Julia's way at all," she replied. "She thinks it wrong to question you about your life apart from her. She says she has no right, and must be deeply grateful for all the time you spare her. I have persuaded her never to read the papers, but just to let me either read aloud, or tell her the leading events of the day. Of course I say all the accounts of murders and suicides are bad for nerves after a serious brain attack. It's really because she might see remarks about you, which would set her thinking. Something Sir Lowther Ormsley had done might coincide with the movements of Frederick Reece, and we mustn't run any risks.""You really are worth your weight in gold, Betty," he replied gratefully. "She tells me you even accompany her on those dreadful slumming expeditions. Isn't that rather a trial?""No," replied Betty, and her tone was absolutely genuine. "When I see the suffering and poverty it makes me so thankful that I have a comfortable home. I knew Julia wouldn't discover anything about you in that part of the world. But one afternoon I did get a very nasty turn. She suggested going to Hyde Park, and though I said I hated being amongst all those smart people with no one to bow to, she would drag me there. You say you don't often go out with your wife, but you drove by us so near that Julia could not have helped seeing you in the open car, only I just happened to spot you first. I took her arm, pulled her right round and pointed to some horses in the Row. I pretended a rider had fallen, and to this day Julia thinks I saw a vision, but that doesn't matter, it served my purpose. Of course if she had noticed you I should have said you were probably with your sister-in-law, but she might have worried. It is the old picture papers, too, I am afraid of, with the wedding portraits of Sir Lowther and his bride."He listened with deep interest, wondering what would happen if Julia's love dream were broken now."I can't help thinking," he said, "that even if she knew she would forgive me. I have tried so hard to prove my devotion, perhaps I could make her believe the truth, that my love for her far exceeds any feeling I ever had for my wife.""It is wiser not to try experiments," said Betty philosophically. "If the worst happens, she might not prove unforgiving. She would have everything to lose, and nothing to gain, by making things awkward for you. Not that she is a bit mercenary; I never knew anyone care less for money. You see she isn't so keen on amusements as other girls; she could get you to take her out somewhere every night if she wanted to be dissipated.""This evening I have a box for the theatre, and I am taking you both," he said hailing a taxi. "I must hurry home now as I have some letters to write before I dress. You will wear that pretty black gown Julia chose for you."Betty nodded."Oh! you needn't get nervous," she declared with a laugh. "I will look quite respectable, all my old things, and the make-up, too, are under lock and key. I suppose you always take a box because it would be awkward if you happened to sit next some of your smart friends in the stalls. You couldn't very well introduce us, could you?""Betty, you are far too sharp. Don't be putting those ideas into Julia's head."The girl looked instantly penitent."Do you think I would? Come now, you know that isn't my way. I've played fair from the first. When I talk of you to Julia, you might be the Angel Gabriel himself."He looked into her eyes with a scrutinising expression. His faith in her was strengthening, and he frequently congratulated himself on discovering Betty's real worth."Do you ever tire of being a third?" he asked with genuine interest. "It is rather a dull game for you after the old days. I often wonder how long you will care to keep it up."Betty's eyes flashed. He could see the colour mounting to her cheeks as she drew herself up with quite an air of dignity."You are expecting your paid servant to give one month's notice," she said with a little sneer. "Well you can put that idea out of your head. "I know lots of girls would find it dull, they always want to be first, but second fiddle quite suits my book. I've had enough of the dregs of life, it was making me old before my time. I've been a new creature since I could sit idly at home, and fold my hands without racking my brain as to where the next meal was to come from. Julia knows what it's done for me, and that adds to her happiness. If her love affair with you didn't make it awkward for her to preach, she would try and convert me next. In the old days she used to go to church on Sunday, however tired she was after the Saturday night's performance, with a matinée thrown in. Now she sometimes stands outside to hear the choir singing, but she doesn't like to attend the service, she says it makes her feel such a hypocrite.""Poor little girl!" murmured the man. "I wish she were less sensitive."Betty watched him drive away with a rather puzzled expression."He is a queer fellow," she thought to herself. "He does not seem to worry a bit about living this double life. I guess I should be all on edge for fear of being found out. Lady Ormsley must be a strange sort of party to put up with such a husband. If I were rich and beautiful like her, I'd keep him at my side all the time, and never brook a rival. It is a good thing he seems pleased with me, and really, in a way, he couldn't have found a better watch dog. I'm awfully fond of my kennel, and he knows I should be the first to bark if I scented danger."On her way back to the flat, she passed a man whom she had known well in the old days. She was so changed, at first he did not recognise her, then, turning back, he peered into her face."Upon my word," he muttered, "I do believe it's Betty Brown."She waved him aside with an air of offence."Quite a mistake, I assure you," she said. "Such a common name too, Betty Brown!"The man smiled as she sailed away with her head in the air, then he burst into laughter. Betty Brown was far down the street and had no idea how thoroughly she had amused him."I heard she had turned respectable," he said to himself. "What a little fool not to know I should recognise her voice!"When Sir Lowther arrived home the footman gave him a message."Her ladyship says would you please go to her boudoir at once?"She had evidently impressed upon the man the urgency of the request, for he emphasized the words as if expecting Sir Lowther to make some excuse. The summons was unusual, for Eva seldom wanted to see him. He wondered a little what it could mean, whether at last she had begun to take offence at his frequent absence."I need hardly flatter myself," he thought. "She always encouraged me to leave her to her own devices. Now it is too late, any love is given to Julia; she is the only woman who has really touched my heart."Eva was seated on the edge of the sofa clasping her knees, a strange fixed expression in her eyes which gave the whole face a sphinx-like look. Beside her the cushions were dented just where Guy Stafford had sat, holding her hand and breathing words of everpowering passion. The whole room seemed full of his influence, his face was mirrored before her eyes just as if he stood between herself and Lowther. She had always retained a sense of his presence for hours after parting, but to-day it was even more vivid as she neared the great crisis of her life."You wanted me," said Lowther, dropping into an arm chair and feeling for his cigarette case. "Any change of plans?"He evidently had not noticed that the rigid figure was tense with emotion. The pallor of her face mattered little to him, for with his cigarette case he pulled from his pocket a small scented handkerchief with Julia's name embroidered in the corner. The perfume brought her vividly to his mind, the woman on the sofa was merely a shadow."That is just what I wanted to speak to you about," she said, "a change of plans. Don't you think, Lowther, our life together is becoming impossible? We haven't escaped the comment of our friends, not that that matters. We can't drag about together just to please society, when we have nothing in common. It is possible to sacrifice too much to appearances."He realised from the tone of her voice something unusual had occurred, noting a faint tremor in the words—"a change of plans." He looked up, seeing for the first time the distress in her widely distended eyes. It almost hurt him to feel that such a beautiful woman could be cold to the core."If only she were not so utterly passionless!" he thought. "Poor despised Julia might teach her a lesson in human feeling and fascination.""Do you mean," he asked, "that you are thinking of a legal separation? I can't see that I am to blame. Two days after our wedding you suddenly turned against me, and I could see that my very touch repelled you. It isn't pleasant for a man to feel a woman shudder when he comes near her, to trace the mark of tears on his bride's face, and find himself bound to one who is utterly incapable of response. Perhaps I was too proud to reproach you for not caring; but it would be interesting to hear why you shunned me in that way. Other women have not found me such a repulsive companion, and you cannot be surprised if I prefer the society of people who appreciate my efforts to please.""Don't imagine," she added quickly, "that I am going to defend myself. I have known from the very beginning that the fault was all mine, but until now I have not had the courage to tell you what was in my heart. It doesn't seem fair to take a man's name, to share his home, and then shut him out from all confidence. One must be frank and open, though sometimes there is a kind of brutality in speaking the truth. I want to ask you whether you care to hear exactly what happened on our honeymoon, and if it would comfort you at all to know that you were not responsible for my sudden revulsion of feeling?"Sir Lowther did not light his cigarette, instead he drew his chair a little nearer, and there was a look of real interest in his face."I think it was your reticence that hurt me most," he said, returning her candour with a sense of relief that he could speak openly. "It is wretched for two people who have actually been through the marriage ceremony and come as near to each other as we have, to go on groping in the dark when an unseen barrier has risen up between them.""I want to treat you as an ordinary man and a confidant," she replied, "not as a husband. I am going to say things which a little while ago would have seemed impossible, but desperate people dare all. There is so much humanity in you. I first liked you because you were a man of the world and I thought you sympathetic."She was inwardly praying she might be given the power to make him understand. Just for a moment she caught her breath wondering if she could face this ordeal, then the memory of Guy Stafford made her strong. In a low emotional voice she forced herself to unfold the story of the past. She began with the early years of her girlhood, when Guy Stafford meant everything to her life. She told how she had waited and longed, always hoping his release might come, if only by the law of man; but his wife gave him no loophole to cast her off. Eva frankly admitted that she always loved Guy Stafford. Yet once she had cared enough for Lowther to try and put the old memories aside, and start a new life. She meant to prove all that a wife should be, though well aware she was by no means his first love. Then her voice broke slightly, as she told the story of those two days and all the bitterness which had eaten into her soul, changing her from a woman to a frozen block of stone. She explained how fate threw Guy Stafford once more across her path, and since the night of that fateful drive after the Dunmar's dinner, her lot had become past hearing. Slowly she led on to the events of that very afternoon, telling her husband almost word for word what had passed between her and Guy Stafford. Keenly she watched for some trace of emotion in Sir Lowther's face. It was like a mask, only now and again a wave of colour mounted to his temples, as he covered his eyes with his hand to hide their expression. He seemed to her like a judge weighing a case in court, she would have given the world to read his thoughts at that moment.As Sir Lowther listened, his mind worked feverishly. It was of Julia he thought and Julia alone. Here was a way out of his difficulty, Eva would be removed, making him a free man. He had tried the experiment of marrying wealth, but his bride, so well known in society, utterly failed to bring him either pleasure or comfort. Julia was different from other women. She loved him though he had tried her trust to the uttermost and lowered her to the depths. What a glorious reparation he could make by raising her, and making her his wife before the world! Surely then she would forgive him the past, knowing he had only deceived her because of his great love. It seemed hardly worth while to make an effort to win Eva back, now that her coldness had killed every germ of affection. Happiness lay within her grasp, then why should he keep her bound and fettered to a faithless husband? It would be a comfort to feel he was not alone to blame; they were on the same level, both drawn by some strong human force, each the victim of overmastering fate.When at last she ceased speaking, there was a moment of tense silence. Eva trembled from head to foot, while the man still sat shading his eyes with his hand. Presently he rose, and the look on his face gave her a sudden thrill of hope. A certain bitterness which marred it of late had vanished, his eyes were looking into hers with a kinder expression; there was nothing of the outraged husband in his manner, he might have been her friend."It was very daring of you," he said, "to speak in this way, to tell me everything. It isn't often a wife consults her own husband about her elopement with another man. There is a certain piquancy in the position which half amuses me. If it were not so deadly serious for you, I could smile. I shall only be pitied, but you will be scorned. Don't think I worry about the name. There are plenty of other women who would gladly bear it honourably to the end; when the whole affair is over, I shall probably marry again. You can do nothing now but follow the dictates of your own heart, and after all these years you cannot well be mistaken in the man who is ready to give up his career to try and make you happy. Honestly, Eva, I hope he will succeed. Our marriage has proved such a miserable failure, that you are in reality making reparation. You need have no fear that I shall be slow in playing my part. As soon as the law sets you free, you can take your lover's name and face the world as best you can. I only hope your own sex will not make you suffer too much. I have often marvelled at the cruelty of women to each other. You must not expect to escape, for your beauty will win you jealousy everywhere. Your plainer sisters will delight in tearing you to pieces. But where real love exists, hatred and malice can go to the wall. I used to think that love was elusive and could never last, but lately I have changed that opinion. It all seems to hang on an accident, just a chance whether the one person crosses your path at the right moment. When they cross at the wrong moment, there's the devil to pay!"He came nearer to Eva and laid both hands oil her shoulders. Now they looked into each other's eyes with a frankness that was new and surprising. They were like two friends suddenly bound together by confidence, each wishing the other well, each glorying in the knowledge of a deep-rooted happiness."Then you have found the one," she said. "I guessed it some time ago though I never questioned you. It was my idea to speak out as I have done to-night; Guy offered to tell you himself, but he has suffered so much oil my account, I wanted to spare you both an embarrassing interview. Don't imagine I am not fully aware of the wrong doing. I am going to risk all, because nothing can compare with love that is capable of such a surrender.""You are right," he replied. "Why kill all that is noblest and best in you because I stand in your light? Destiny played you an ugly trick, and when I felt you growing cold there was no heart left in me to try and win you back. Perhaps if I had been a stronger man, if I had fought for the love I lost, I might have conquered in the end, I might have kept you. Instead, I turned to my old companions, it was the simplest thing to do, and it has always been my way to chose the easy path. I am something of a fatalist and never fight the inevitable."Eva turned away, comparing, in her mind, his weakness with Guy Stafford's strength."You are going out?" she said. "You will be late?"She longed to be alone, alone with the burning thoughts in her brain."Is Guy Stafford coming back tonight to hear the result of this interview?" asked Lowther, as he moved to the door.She bowed her head in silent assent."At what time?" he queried.She wondered why he asked, somehow she could not loot up at him, but hung her head as if in shame."Nine o'clock," she replied trying to speak naturally."And you are alone?" said Lowther. "Why doesn't he come and dine with you? If you like I will ring him up and tell him to be here as quickly as possible, he will know what the message means, especially from me.""Oh! don't, please don't!" gasped Eva, for she fancied she traced a satirical note in his voice, as if he were enjoying a terrible jest at her expense.The door closed, and she thought no more of his parting words.Lowther suddenly attracted by the idea, went to his study and rung up Guy Stafford."Are you there?""Yes, who is it?""Lowther Ormsley. Am I speaking to Stafford?""Yes."The single syllable was repeated. Evidently from the hesitation in the distant voice, Guy Stafford was at a less for words."I rang up to ask if you will dine with my wife tonight," Lowther continued breezily. "I am going out, and she wants to see you on rather an urgent matter. By the way you might bring a Bradshaw with you."Here he cut off the connection, and turned away with a ribald laugh."What a callous brute he will think me! " he said to himself, "but a sense of humour is sometimes the salvation of a tragedy."CHAPTER XXIINo one could fail to notice the sudden change which had come over Lady Ormsley. All her apathy vanished; she looked like a girl again, radiant, spontaneous, excited. It was not that she was so wonderfully glad, for fear knocked at her heart, and conscience woke to life as an ever constant companion to embitter joy. Yet all the world seemed changed. Life held a fresh aspect. She looked out upon the future like some traveller who starts on a journey of adventure into an unknown land. Nothing now appeared tame or commonplace, there was a certain charm in all the little everyday incidents which before appeared so monotonous. She wanted to be kind to everybody, telling herself when meeting friends it would probably be for the last time. A strange finality hung over every deed and action of her present life. She felt like a woman who was going to die, and wished to leave a good impression on those who must remain behind. Her manner to her servants changed; they wondered why their mistress had become so much nicer for apparently no reason. They looked upon her as a somewhat glacial personality, very just, proud and aloof. Now she took pains to show them the humanity in her, enquiring about their homes with a show of kindly interest, and giving them unexpected little presents which were really tokens of farewell.Sir Lowther was in absolute ignorance as to the date of her departure, and the strange topic they once discussed was not again alluded to. He could only act extreme aston-ishment when the crisis came, since they might suffer in the future if any suspected that he had given his consent.Eva was not fond of calling, but for the last day or two she had paid a round of visits to her friends and relatives. Each house she entered gave her a fresh thrill. It was so strange, knowing what was ahead, to feel sure of a warm greeting, when a few weeks later those very doors would be closed against her. Many remarked when she left, that marriage had certainly improved her, there was a visible sweetness in her manner, and a tenderness in her eyes which greatly added to her beauty. She was so much more sympathetic and interested in their doings, none suspected that her warm kiss of good-bye was a leave-taking, perhaps forever.Her last visit was to Sir Lowther's aunt, the Marchioness of Ailstair, whose house was considered one of the most exclusive in London. Up-to-date fashions and modern manners were anathema to this grande dame of the old school. Her life was regulated by early Victorian precision, and none upon whom a breath of scandal had blown were permitted to enter her doors. No matter how high their birth, if they fell short of her standard, they were instantly written down on a black list.As Eva entered the room, the coldly critical old lady unbent perceptibly; her face broke into welcoming smiles, as she kissed her niece with warm affection."I have expected you every day, my dear," she said, holding Eva's hands. "I know how busy you must have been, or you would have come before. Certainly all the accounts I have heard of you are very flattering, Lowther could not have made a better choice."She looked approvingly at Lady Ormsley's tasteful garments, for the dress of the day was her special sorrow; bright colours and bizarre effects still savoured of vulgarity to a mind which had never marched with the times."It is delightful," she added, "to see someone who who doesn't look like a poster, really the gowns now-a-days are too amazing! You, Eva, could never lapse into the glaring errors of taste I had to endure at my last reception. Women I have known ever since childhood, with immaculate reputations, really looked to me like musical comedy actresses. Still, I suppose it is foolish to grumble at the fashions. If their hearts are right, it doesn't so much matter about clothes."The visitor was trying to picture Lady Ailstair's feelings when she heard that Lowther's wife had deserted him. How she would remember this meeting, the words they had exchanged on commonplace subjects, and the compliments she had paid the bride!Eva made conversation in a rather hurried and unnatural tone, but the old lady apparently did not notice anything strange in her manner."I have had something on my mind," she told Eva, "which has really quite upset me. A woman who ought to know better, for she is the daughter of one of my most valued friends, and was reared in a very strict school, brought a certain Mrs. Marsh to my 'At Home,' whom I have since heard has a history. It was a piece of great impertinence, introducing her to my set, but luckily I have been able to speak a word of warning to several who made friends with her, thinking she was an acquaintance of mine. Was she by any chance forced upon you? She was a little fair woman, with rather round blue eyes and delicate features.""Oh! yes," said Eva quickly. "I remember her perfectly; we went in to tea together. She asked me to call and gave me her card. I promised to do so, but until this moment I had forgotten all about it. Are you really afraid I should be contaminated if I kept my word, and dropped a piece of pasteboard at her house?"Eva spoke in a, tone of cynical raillery, looking her aunt straight in the face with eyes that puzzled Lady Ailstair."Yes," she replied firmly, "you would be doing yourself harm because in your position you should set an example. If people who have behaved in an outrageous way are to be welcomed back with open arms, the whole structure of Society will fall. I understand this Mrs. Marsh was married at one time to quite a well-known man. Then there was a scandal, and later she became the wife of a certain Captain Marsh, who was obliged to leave his regiment. It is impudent of such people to try and push their way back into a respectable set. I hear she has taken a house in Eaton Square, and may gather some sort of a crowd around her, but women like yourself will certainly give her the cold shoulder. There is no excuse for such people. In the old days they would never have attempted to show their faces again in Society; it is a sign of the times that some are able to live it down. In my youth, people of that kind had not the ghost of a chance.""Poor aunt," declared Eva, laughing. "It is, indeed, terrible to think she ate your cakes and sipped your coffee. Did you have the rooms disinfected after she left?"Lady Ailstair forced a smile to veil her displeasure at Eva's levity."You come from the new world," she said, "and I sometimes think the Americans have done a great deal to uproot the old laws which gave England such a splendid moral foundation in the eighties. But to speak of pleasanter matters, I was going to suggest that I should present you at Court early next spring, on your marriage. Lowther spoke to me about it some time ago, he said he would rather you went with me than anyone else."Next spring! How the words rang in Eva's brain! Where would she be then? By that time, perhaps, the Marchioness of Ailstair would even have forgotten the pang of horror she had felt when thinking of her nephew's wife."It is very good of you," she replied in an unconcerned tone, "but I don't think I shall trouble about it. You see, I went so often as a girl."Lady Ailstair drew herself up, and raised her eyebrows in shocked surprise."My dear, you can't think what you are saying! It would be most incorrect for you to shirk this obvious duty. I hope you are not turning socialistic. In these days especially, it is right that one in your position should pay due respect to such observances.""Very well," replied Eva, "if you are willing to take me, I will go."A sudden hysterical feeling came over her that she must burst out laughing. The old lady's attitude towards the world was rousing in Eva's heart a sense of devilry, quite new to a nature which usually shrank from anything evil."Such an atmosphere as this," she thought, "might be responsible for any amount of wrong doing."She wondered if in the whole of Lady Ailstair's composition, there was one spark of sympathy for those who had suffered and fallen short of the mark. The narrow shutters of her soul were closed towards the weak; no helping hand could ever be held out to an erring sister."You must forgive a short visit," said Eva, rising. "I have several more to pay, and you know what a rush life is. I shall be going away soon for a little change, I am already tired of the social round.""You don't look tired with that bright colour," replied the old lady, kissing Eva condescendingly, as if conferring a royal favour. "But everyone now-a-days rushes after change. The week-end exodus from town has made my Sunday afternoons extremely dull. I used to have quite a social gathering here before motor cars came into fashion. Still, I daresay it will do Lowther good, he was looking pale the last time I saw him. London is a poor place for men; they can't get on without sport."As Eva reached the hall she made a sudden resolve."Have you a London Directory?" she asked one of the men-servants. "I want to look up an address I have forgotten."He fetched the required book and asked to be allowed to find the name."I want to know the number of a Mrs. Marsh in Eaton Square. I have mislaid her card."The information was quickly given, and Eva hoped fervently she might find this woman at home, knowing that she had passed through an experience similar to the one which must now make or mar her own destiny.Fate favoured her, and a few minutes later she was being shown up a red-carpeted staircase into a white and gold drawing room.She had several minutes to wait before Mrs. Marsh appeared, and noticed a great display of photographs in prominent places about the room. Many were of men in uniform, and some bore the names of well-known Society women, signed and, unfortunately, dated. Eva was quick to notice that most of the dates were several years old, and instinctively wondered if all these people had since dropped Mrs. Marsh.It was evident that Lady Ormsley's visit was warmly welcome, for, as Mrs. Marsh entered the room, she did not attempt to disguise her pleasure."This is more than kind of you," she exclaimed, "for I never really thought you would come. You told me at Lady Ailstair's how very busy you were. It was a delightful party, only somehow Lady Ailstair herself is rather a terrifying personality. I don't quite like her judicial expression. I should think she would be very down on anyone who offended her.""You are a quick judge of character," replied Eva, smiling. "My husband tells me she is always known as 'the dragon,' yet she never inspires me with the slightest qualm of fear. I am afraid I rather shocked her to-day, but, of course, it dues her good. She has such a way of finding out things about people. If these discoveries do not fall in with her own ideas of propriety, the new acquaintances are wiped off the slate, though she knows nothing of the real facts of the case. I am expecting to fall foul of her soon.""That is not very likely," replied Mrs. Marsh, and now her delicate skin flushed suddenly. It seemed as if she longed to speak to this stranger straight from her heart. She never knew why, but somehow Eva's presence drew forth unexpected confidence."Lady Ormsley," she said, "I took such a tremendous fancy to you, that I should just hate to know you under false pretences. It would hurt me dreadfully if we became friends now, and then in time you dropped me, when I liked you even more than I do at present. I am not frank with most people, because I have something to hide. I don't want you to hear about me from Lady Ailstair, for I have a shrewd suspicion she has scented out my past. I was very unhappily married some years ago. You see, I was only seventeen when my people urged me to marry a man twenty years older than myself. After that all the trouble began. Perhaps you can guess how I was able to marry Captain Marsh. My first husband is still alive, and when people find this out they often drop me suddenly. You can't think how I have suffered, it is always cropping up at every turn. I try not to let this sour my life; I do so long to have nice women friends. You could be such a pillar of strength; but there is something about you which makes it impossible to accept your friendship without being quite frank. I felt awfully touched at your coming here to-day. It shows you like me a little, or you would not have taken the trouble."As Eva listened a lump rose in her throat, for the woman's tone unconsciously revealed how deeply she had been made to suffer. It was almost pitiful to think she should confide in Lady Ormsley, hoping that her friendship might prove a rock of defence, a stepping stone back to the lost sphere."You had a right to make your own life," said Eva, feeling her words were somewhat feeble. "We can none of us legislate for others. But tell me, Mrs. Marsh, if you could go back and live your life again, would you tread that same path? I am asking you this in confidence, since you have been so frank with me. Don't answer lightly, for the question is put to you by a woman whose home is thoroughly unhappy. A loveless life is very terrible. Is it not better to do what you did and escape from misery? When love is found, does that not compensate for all?"The large blue eyes in the small Dresden china face, were very widely opened now. Mrs. Marsh had little suspected that her sudden burst of confidence would meet with a return. She could read in Eva's expression the inner working of her soul. So she, too, stood on the brink of a precipice.Mrs. Marsh stretched out a pair of fluttering hands, as if in sudden supplication."Don't do it," she said quickly under her breath. "If you are contemplating giving up your position, and for the sake of a passion, however strong, falling to the depths, hold back, for you don't know what it means. At first you will be happy, because the world doesn't matter when your brain is in a whirl, and your days seem like a dream. But the hour comes when one is bound to wake up. You look back on the past life and think what you have lost, I often take up an old photograph of myself, gaze into the eyes, and say: 'that's what you were!' Then I go to the glass and look at my face to-day. I see what, perhaps, isn't visible to you, the lines which have come, and the subtle change, because the world has given me such ugly knocks. Your husband may love you ever so dearly, and, of course, you try to hide from him the bitterness of it all, but you can never feel the same again, you are perpetually under a cloud. The feast is never quite free from the skeleton, and your portion is often the Dead Sea fruit. You hear a whisper, you watch for the shrug of the shoulders, you struggle for your place and are pushed back. Even since I came to this house, it has happened constantly. There is more in a woman than love and passion, afterwards, pride and honour seem the greatest things in the world. They are cold companions when the fever is upon you, but the madness of infatuation must fade away in time. Oh! I don't know when I have spoken so freely. Perhaps I am misjudging you, perhaps you have never had a thought of wrong."Eva's hands were clenched; she turned very pale as she listened."I am so sorry," she murmured, "that you feel it like this. You are too frail and sensitive to bear the slights of the world, but perhaps I am made of sterner material. If I ever decide to give up my present life I shall do it with the same sense of resolution that a man or woman commits suicide. I shall not try to come back to my friends, for if I killed myself, a return to the old scenes would be impossible. I daresay before long you will hear the tongues of scandal-mongers busy with my name. Don't pity me, because I am older and stronger than you."She thought as she looked at Mrs. Marsh she could not be more than five and twenty, and there was a frailty about her which instantly arrested sympathy."Oh! if only I could stop you!" cried the younger woman. "Can't I say anything to make you feel how much it hurts? I was just the same once; I could have laughed at anyone who moralised about the future. It is only when you have been through it all, you can realise what remorse means."Eva half wished she had not come, for she felt she had only saddened this woman who at first was so delighted at her visit."How unconventional we have been!" said Lady Ormsley, glancing at the clock, surprised to see the lateness of the hour. "I came because you asked me and I really wanted to see you. I never thought that we should confide in each other, but you started it, didn't you? Some day I will write to you and tell you more about myself."She held out her hand in farewell, and Mrs. Marsh took it in both her own."You won't do it, I know you won't do it; you are not the kind."There was a smile of certainty on the fragile face as it looked up at Lady Ormsley's radiant countenance."You have greater faith in me than I have in myself," she answered quietly."But think, you have so much to lose," urged Mrs. Marsh. "I always said I should like a title, but perhaps that was rather snobbish of me, and every year they grow more general."Eva smiled assent."A title," she declared, "is a poor possession if it robs you of happiness. The very sound of it jars on the ear. When Lady Ormsley is heard of no more, you need not tremble for her because she has taken another name."Eva moved to the door and Mrs. Marsh thought how tall and regal she looked. Directly she was out of sight, the little woman covered her face with her hands, and sent up a fervent prayer that the shadow of shame might never fall on one who could not realise what the loss of name and character meant."Surely, you want me to accompany you, my lady?" said Eva's maid, looking up from the boxes she was packing."No, Annette, I told you before there would be no room. I am going for a motor tour and shall have my other boxes forwarded later."Annette had been Lady Ormsley's maid before her marriage, and marvelled that she should go away unattended. She felt a little suspicious about this sudden journey, especially as she knew the chauffeur had received no orders. It was easy to see Lady Ormsley was strung up and unnerved, moving restlessly about the house, giving the most definite orders as to what she would take away. Usually she left a good deal to Annette, but on this occasion she examined every dainty garment which the maid spread out for her inspection. It seemed strange she was not starting by daylight, the things were to be ready that evening; evidently she wished to leave after dark."Will your ladyship wear the new motor coat and hat which arrived this morning?" asked Annette, surprised her mistress should have ordered fresh garments so soon after the recent trousseau.Eva felt suddenly conscious of the girl's scrutiny, and turned away to hide the flushing of her cheeks. She wondered whether Annette would come to her later, or if she would consider her character lost if she returned to Lady Ormsley before the divorce.Lowther had every reason to believe Eva was leaving home that day. She tried to convey the fact when she said good-bye to him in the morning. He was taking Julia out for an expedition, and did not intend to return much before midnight."I am going into the country," he told his wife, "with some friends. I suppose it makes no difference to you what time I return?""No," she replied. "I, too, have a very special engagement. There is a full harvest moon, and I shall be motoring this evening; how glorious it will be rushing along through the night! The country looks so weird, it makes one feel inclined never to turn back.""Yes," he answered, "some journeys are like time, you cannot go back if you will."He noticed how she bowed her head, silently assenting to his words. Then he turned away quickly and strode out of the house, his features set, but his eyes radiant."The barriers are breaking," he told himself. "How little Julia thinks what to-day means for her and for me!"Eva stayed in her room that afternoon, saying she wished to rest, and as twilight fell she knelt by her window, thinking deep thoughts, half joyful, half terrified, yet with a sense of definite resolution, since her word had been given to Guy.Presently a high-powered, six cylinder car drew up at the door, with a foreign chauffeur, a man likely to ask no questions. He had a splendid reputation as a driver, though desperately keen on speed.The footmen looked curiously at the car as they put in her ladyship's luggage, but there was nothing to show them who was the owner of this apparently bran new motor.Eva stepped in, her face thickly veiled, and gave no instructions as to her return. The car whirled her away, and a moment later, a man waiting in an adjoining square, sprang to her side."Darling," he whispered, "up to the last moment I feared you would not come. Bless you for your courage and your trust."They were close together, hand clasped in hand beneath the sheltering rug."We are going to motor half through the night," he told her, "far away over the hills. Won't it be entrancing, Eva, rushing on, on together to our new life? Has anything been so wonderful since the world began? Tell me you are happy. If I made you sad I would give you up, even now, though it killed me."She raised her heavy veil, flung it back, and gazed at him with an expression in her eyes that soothed his fears. Long and fervently they looked into one another's faces, and the look told all the lips could not express. Eva's eyes were filled with a strange mysterious rapture; her brain was dizzy, every nerve tingled with a sensation of curious expectancy. The hours flew by, each with a fresh thrill of its own, as the magic of the perfect summer night enveloped the escaping lovers. Fuller and fuller rose the moon in the heavens; above theirs the myriad stars kept watch over the sleeping world. The night air felt crisp and bracing. Over the wild hills this giant of speed carried them with leaps and bounds, like a thing of human force and feeling. They would not allow themselves to think of the past; even the future was veiled. Only the present counted, lulled by the perfect romance of nature's stillness.Not till the early hours of the morning did they halt at the far-away haven of refuge, where Lady Ormsley and Guy Stafford were to take the first plunge into a new existence.As Eva stepped from the car she trembled violently, but the man knew nothing of her fear—the man was completely happy.CHAPTER XXIII"LATELY you have quite puzzled me, Julia," said Betty, who always prided herself she was entirely in her friend's confidence. "You look even happier than when you first came back, after your illness, to find that Mr. Reece was still faithful. Although you are so deeply in love with him you don't worry over the fact that he wants us to go away alone for a summer holiday. Of course it is delightful to be able to choose any place you like abroad for a pleasure trip, still, a little time ago you wouldn't have found any joy in it without him."Julia looked up from a piece of embroidery, for needle-work was her chief occupation. She was very artistic, and loved to make dainty contributions for bazaars and sales of work. Betty was seated at a desk writing a list of things required for the prospective journey."I can't hide anything from you, can I?" laughed Julia, and her tone was so light hearted it was in keeping with the joyful expression in her eyes. "I have a reason for being secretly happy because, lately, such a change has come over Fred when we are alone together. At one time he never spoke of the possibility of marriage. Now he has alluded to it once or twice in a way which positively startled me. Every time we meet I feel as if his affection grew deeper; it is now less a thing of the senses, more of the heart and intellect. He consults me about matters he never spoke of before, and treats me as if I were on his own level. Only yesterday he said that whenever he took my advice he was always successful.""I should think so," declared Betty. "Mr. Reece is just beginning to show his sense. He has found a woman who suits him down to the ground, but I wouldn't he thinking of marriage, Julia; men often say things they don't mean. He might raise your hopes in a moment of expansion, and change his mind directly he turned his hack on the flat. Things go on very well as they are, no chance of his deserting you for anyone else."In her heart Betty was seething with fury. How could this man, who was living under an assumed name, dare to speak thus, when he was already married? It was a refinement of cruelty, taking a mean advantage, paving the way towards bitter disappointment."I should have said just the same a little while ago," replied Julia, in a tone of confidence which further raised Betty's alarm, "but Fred's view of things seems to have changed, and he has confided a secret to me which later on will be public property. You remember his brother, Sir Lowther Ormsley, who married recently?"Betty nodded her head, she could not speak. Only the tell-tale colour rose in such a wave to her face that she turned away as if busying herself with the now neglected list."What has he been saying about Sir Lowther?" she asked trying to make her voice sound natural. She still kept her head averted as she stared down at the written words, seeing nothing. Only she listened with intense curiosity for Julia's reply."Oh! Sir Lowther's marriage to the American heiress has proved an utter failure. People don't know about it yet, but she has already left him for another man. Fred says it only shows that these wealthy Society women, who are considered such suitable brides, sometimes turn out far worse than people with less education and apparent advantages. He warmly declared that Lowther would have been much happier had he married a girl like myself, of whom Society had never heard, and it was then he began to enthuse over my good qualities. It is so extraordinary to hear him call me good; men's minds are a mystery! I suppose a woman they love can never seem wicked. They would probably condemn a crime committed by anyone else, but they like to think their own case is different. Of course Sir Lowther will divorce his wife, and it will be undefended. He will do his best to keep the scandal out of the papers, and he is quite sure his wife's admirer will marry her directly she gets her freedom. His brother's misfortune seems to have quite put him off the women he meets at those big house parties in the country. I am not sure he wouldn't marry me at once, only he is waiting to convince himself that my cure is permanent. It appears that the doctor at the asylum told him if I kept well for a whole year, the chances were I should never have another breakdown. At the end of that time, if we are still as fond of each other, he may raise me to the proud position of his wife. That is why he does not want to follow us abroad. He is anxious to guard my name from any gossip which might injure me afterwards, and I am only too glad he is so considerate. With such a hope ahead, can you wonder that I am a changed woman?"Betty was sitting now with her elbows on the desk, her forehead clasped in both hands. Her brain was working quickly, as she unravelled the tangled skein."So that's the way of it," she thought. "Lady Ormsley has bolted, unable to stand her husband's neglect. Ten to one she knew all about Julia. He has made up that story of the doctor, hoping to keep his caged bird silent for a year. He must really contemplate marriage with her, when the present Lady Ormsley has been wiped off the slate. My word, what luck for Julia! She will have to know what has happened in the past, but she is sure to forgive when he offers her his name and title. I expect she will be too grand even to speak to me then. I shall take a back seat gladly enough, and Sir Lowther is so generous with his money, I daresay he won't forget me. Of course he is not coming away with us; that might tell against his getting the divorce. He is a wily bird, and fate seems playing most conveniently into his hands."Now Betty rose and went towards her friend. Putting her arras round Julia, she gave her a warm kiss of congratulation."You deserve any luck that comes your way, dear old girl!" she exclaimed. "No man could find a sweeter-tempered wife, and I think he is jolly fortunate. I always had a feeling something would make you completely happy in the end. I must own I did not expect it would be marriage. I pictured you getting so used to this life, that your reliance on Mr. Reece would soothe all your fears and qualms of conscience. Of course he calls you good, if he didn't, he would have to call himself wicked; he wouldn't like that! I think I know why you manage him so successfully. Like most of the sex he is conceited, and you pander to his self love in the most delicious way possible. Many girls would gladly take a leaf from your book, if they could act the part. But you are not acting, it is just natural, which is so fortunate. I know I could never get on with a man like that, I should be up against him with some of my opinions in a minute. I don't suppose I shall ever have a chance of settling down, and in time I shall develop into an elderly man-hating female. But heaven knows I don't hate them without cause."Betty's tone of bitterness was broken by a laugh. Whenever she felt inclined to dwell on her old life, she forced herself to change the subject, and remember present advantages."To-morrow, we shall have to pack," she said. "You can't think how excited I feel at the prospect of going abroad. It will be so wonderful to travel about with a clever companion like you, Julia. I wish I had your knowledge of things and places, you must dole it out to me second-hand, and I will try not to be a drag on you. I suppose Mr. Reece will be coming to-night to see the last of us. Perhaps it is as well we are leaving him behind, it is good for him to miss you sometimes. Probably his deserted brother will be wanting his companionship."There was something a little cynical in Betty's tone, but Julia did not notice this; she was too busy with her own bright thoughts and the wonderful hope which the future held.CHAPTER XXIVSUZANNE and Velvein were still snaking their pilgrimage through the world. No form of misery had escaped the watchful eyes of this earth-bound spirit."I have helped sufferers a little, but I want to help them so much more," Suzanne said. "If only they could hear my voice!""The angels are always saying that," murmured Velvein sorrowfully. "Of course they could hear if they cared to listen, that's where the tragedy lies; they shut their ears wilfully, because they want to drive us out. Only last night you tried to speak to a man whose whole being was on fire with the fever of gambling. This passion became the dominating feature of his life; it ruined his family and destroyed him. Then drink followed, and a power higher than the angels must lift him out of the horrible pit in which he has set his feet. Afterwards I showed you the life of the drug taker, the most soul-killing form of sin which exists. You saw a human body bereft of self respect, no truth of character left—a will once free, bound in fetters. Night and day the weakened flesh is victimised by an endless craving and desire. Into such an abyss I could only let you look for a moment.""Yes," said Suzanne, "I saw the touch of divinity in those hopeless, broken men and women. Though crushed and almost destroyed, the faint spark lingered, some day to rekindle when they are purged from their sins. If they will not listen to unseen guides, there are people in the world doing the angels' work, trying to lift up their brothers and sisters, striving for no profit but the good of the world. I often think how swiftly they will fly across the Gulf. What triumph, when glorious light breaks upon their vision, and they go straight to their reward!""Soon, we shall return to the Gulf," said Velvein. "Your wings are very different now. Sympathy has given them a power they never knew before, and they are bright with the glow of unselfish love which comes from your soul. Tell me, Suzanne, why do you sometimes draw back, and hesitate when I speak of the Gulf? Do you doubt that you are growing strong? Have I ever deceived you?""I believe you knew the reason," she whispered. "Surely, Velvein, you have guessed!"He made no reply, for he had asked her a question and she knew she must answer; there was often something a little relentless about her guide."It is Hugh Carlisle who keeps me here," she confessed. "His love binds me to earth. I am always haunted by the memory of my last night in the world. I want to fly across with him, hand in hand. Let me wait until he comes, that I may help him with my presence. What if I reached that city of light, and forgot him in my ecstasy? His mother has passed on; she did not wait for her boy. He is always praying that he may find me. Surely his prayer will be answered—I shall be allowed to make this sacrifice for his sake?"Velvein's face was full of mystery as he listened to her words."I have tried to teach you many things," he said, "yet still you are very ignorant. You ask me this favour as if I were able to grant it, when I have told you so often your destiny does not he in my hands. You must snake your request known to the infinite power beyond. No word of mine can help you. If your prayer is strong enough, perhaps I shall be allowed to leave you behind."Suzanne moved nearer to Velvein that she might feel the shelter of his wings."I shall ask for you to stay with me," she said. "I dare not be left alone.""That is impossible," he replied. "When you are freed from your earth-hound state and ready to mingle with the blest, you will have no more need of my presence. I shall be given another life to guard; perhaps I shall have greater success with that earthly being than when I was told to watch over you. It was the lack of sorrow which made you so unapproachable, it is rarely that a creature exists so free from care as Suzanne de Malincourt in her earth life.""If only," said Suzanne, "you could be sent to guard the little child who is living with my mother. She has known sorrow from infancy; the ugly things were never hidden from her, and she is none the worse for knowing the world is not made up of happiness. She even understands about my father, and is not afraid to go and play with him in the garden of his prison. I think that touches my mother most of all, her tender solicitude towards one whose body is old, but whose mind has gone back to childhood. It is strange for anyone so young to sympathise and understand, but jenny is a real solace, and has brightened my mother's days even as an angel might. If only Hugh Carlisle could be comforted by some. Human touch! His studies are cold; he wants more than learning to ease his mind. Flesh and blood alone could do it in the world, but he has cut himself off from the sympathy of men and women. I sometimes wish my spirit had not spoken to his when he lay unconscious in the dungeon. Now it is always the strongest influence, and he is just waiting, waiting till we meet again.""Don't pity him too much," whispered Velvein in a reassuring tone. "Earth love often disappoints, and passion dies; but his desire to reach you will strengthen with the years. Nothing spiritual is lost, and though the waiting may be weary, the joy will be all the keener when his soul breaks free.""Sometimes," said Suzanne, "I come to him in dreams. Then his soul floats out of his body and escapes away for a few brief moments, only to be drawn back by the human chains. But those moments make heaven for him, that is why he is so incomprehensible to his friends, who count for nothing. They have tried to get him back, to win him to the world, but are gradually giving up the effort, and in time will leave him altogether undisturbed. It is rare to find a hermit in that great city of London, where good and evil are always at war, where purity and vice meet in an endless struggle. If I could go back now, knowing all I do, I don't believe they would listen to me. They are all like people in a fog pressing forward blindfold; but for their guardian angels they would never find the way. I wish I could tell the length of Hugh's life. You do not know, Velvein?"The angel bowed his head."That is the great secret of all," he answered. "I cannot tell you the number of his days, but could you wait for him even though he lived to be quite an old man? Would you hold back, and give up the bliss offered you, because he was still below? You would hear the sound of rejoicing, see glad souls flying to freedom, and all the time you would long to follow in their wake. You do not realise what you are asking, for if your request is granted, it will mean an effort of self sacrifice, night and day, throughout the years until he joins you. The time will be counted as it is in life, but should you cross the Gulf you will not know the meaning of time, and then he will come to you immediately.""I would gladly wait," said Suzanne, "if it were for him. Don't you understand, Velvein, that makes all the difference? You have taught me so much; how wonderful, if, at last, I could teach you something in return!""That is possible," he said, "for even the angels cannot gauge the depths of a woman's love. It is wider than the heavens, it is stronger than death. The child born of it is self sacrifice, an offspring, deathless as the spirit which defies the grave. This desire to sacrifice yourself, to wait and seek your rest together, is the sweetest note in the whole of your life's melody; to such music God himself beats the time. I do not doubt your prayer will be answered. Love is God-given, and sacrifice makes it eternal in the great symphony of the spheres."A sense of inward peace stole over Suzanne. She had feared earth ties might be forgotten in that city of infinite light; now fresh courage welled into her heart, a joy which could not perish."I am going to pray," she said. "Let us listen for the answer; perhaps we shall hear it breathed on the wind."She bent her head and folded her hands."Look up, speak out, be strong," whispered Velvein. "God loves a smile from the soul that is true. Life is pain, and pain is purification, and after purification comes peace. You missed the pain of earth, that was why you were still bound down. Now you could soar, but your desire to stay is a mark of power, and not of weakness. It is the price of a selfish love. Tile Maker of great and small things will weigh your motive, and know its worth."They were silent, and as Suzanne gazed upwards, Velvein knew her prayer would be granted."Love is the strongest weapon she could wield," he thought. "It snakes her powerful as the spirits of light. She is holding back from the kingdom prepared for her, but the King who knows all hearts will forgive and under-stand."CHAPTER XXVIT was a year since Hugh Carlisle left Dr. Giraudet's house, and the Frenchman often wondered how his English patient was getting on. The few letters he received said nothing of Carlisle's health, but always repeated a pressing invitation, should the doctor care to visit him in England. Now it seemed that destiny intended them to meet, for Dr. Giraudet's presence was greatly desired at a medical congress in London, and the thought of staying with Hugh Carlisle gave him a strange thrill of pleasure. He had always felt a keen interest in the man he helped to rescue from Sainte Bruyère."I expect," he thought as he journeyed London-wards with Hugh's letter of warm welcome in his pocket, "I shall see a remarkable change in the gaunt skeleton whom my servants believed to be supernatural. By now, he will have lost that far-away look in his eyes, and the weird personality which made him appear like a walking corpse. The world must have lured him back with its enticing music; for after all he is a man and young, unfitted by nature for a hermit's life. I never believed in his theory that he had left his soul on the other side. Spiritual love may satisfy human nature when the body is weak and ailing, but now his strength has revived, I shall probably find a very different man."Although the doctor hoped this might be so, there was a certain fascination in remembering that weird aloofness which characterised de Malincourt's victim. There was a dignity about it which appealed to Dr. Giraudet who at heart was an ascetic. Even now he sometimes turned in fancy to the priestly life he once intended to embrace.To his surprise, on arriving at Chelsea, he found that his preconceived ideas were quite inaccurate. Carlisle had shut out the world with a determined hand, and not for a moment had he relaxed from his attitude of hermit. In appearance he was just as wan looking as when he crept back to life under Dr. Giraudet's roof. The medical man wisely made no comment on his friend's appearance; he knew that unless you could congratulate a person upon good health, silence was the safest policy. He was just a little glad from a selfish point of view that Hugh Carlisle was so unchanged. The atmosphere of the house was peculiarly restful to a hard worker, while nothing could be desired on the score of hospitality. It seemed as if the host could not do enough for the guest who had condemned him to a life of waiting.Mrs. Holland was quite motherly in her concern for the doctor's comfort, and amused him with her voluble talk when he tried to draw her out on the subject of her master."Oh! He is well enough in health, bless him!" she said, "he eats his food regularly, and goes out for a walk every evening after dinner for exercise. It suits him best to work by daylight, then he avoids meeting people, and having to talk to them. I find it almost impossible to believe he is the same Mr. Hugh who visited his mother at this very house. Then he was a high spirited young gentleman, always full of his gay doings, enjoying life as people should who have health, money and good looks. You are the only visitor who has stayed here since his return; he seemed really pleased when he got your letter. Not but what he felt wild enough to think you saved him once he was dead. He didn't want to come back to the world, I expect he has rubbed it in, and told you so time and again. Still, you did your duty nobly, sir, and if I may take the liberty, I should like to thank you from my heart. If I had lost him as well as my dear mistress, the world would have seemed terribly empty. You see, I have known him since he was a child, so somehow he seems to belong to me a little. If you could do anything to shake him out of himself, it would be a really good work. Surely he can't be a recluse for ever! It wouldn't be natural at his age."Mrs. Holland was deeply impressed by the doctor's attentive air as he listened to her words. She was so used to being cut short, it was quite delightful to find a gentleman who appeared neither impatient nor bored."If he is happy," replied the doctor, "why should you want to hustle him back to a world which could never satisfy him in the same way, since the mind must be tuned to enjoy? It is really wonderful that he woke up from his illness with all his intellectual faculties unimpaired. He might never have recovered from the shock of incarceration; instead, he is sane, and the man who tried to murder him is the victim of insanity.""Oh! I know all about that gentleman," said Mrs. Holland, proud of her knowledge. "My little niece lives with Madame de Malincourt, and I am great friends with her maid Martha. She gave me a terrible account of her experiences in Paris, it was long before she recovered from her fight with the madman, who might easily have finished her off. It is lucky he will never get out to harm others. If there is one thing I am afraid of, it is madness."Dr. Giraudet nodded his head assentingly."You have very good reason," he said. "One can grapple with vice, for even in the wickedest heart there is some strain of reasoning, and possibly a note of pity. No one is utterly evil. Madness acknowledges no chains; the powers of hell run loose in the unbalanced mind. More crimes have been committed through purposeless insanity, than desire for gain, or love of greed. It is my business to mend the brain; often it proves a most disheartening task."The gong sounded for dinner, and Mrs. Holland, who had waylaid the doctor, apologised for detaining him so long."I don't know what the master would think," she said, "at my talking to you like this. I only ventured to speak knowing how cleverly you pulled him round, he has been much more cheerful since expecting your arrival. Night after night he dines alone, and I often wonder what he thinks about, for sometimes the servants wait and wait, seeing he has quite forgotten to finish his food. He appears miles away in a reverie, and they tell me that they sometimes cough loudly, or clatter some plates, to bring him back to the present."Throughout the meal the doctor and his host conversed chiefly in French. It was pleasant to talk thus confidentially, though when they went to the library to smoke, Dr. Giraudet suddenly changed to the English tongue."Now," he said, "I will give you a rest, we'll talk English. I want to hear all about that hobby of yours. You remember you told me it was your intention to seek for knowledge. You were deeply interested in the subject of religion, which had escaped you until your brief sojourn on the border of another land. Has learning or research brought you any consolation?"Carlisle looked up, and his eyes were suddenly animated; something of their old fire returned."Consolation," he said, "is rather a big word. Perhaps I don't want to be consoled, for in some strange way my grief is my joy. If I were to get over a bereavement which men say has marred my life, I should lose the sweetest memory and the highest influence a human being can ever be privileged to know. Of course I had to occupy my mind, so like many a person who is at a loose end, I decided to write a book. It is not finished yet, for it is a work of research, a treatise on various religions which appeal to me from different points of view. The thing which struck me most is the mixture of saintliness and devilry, which, sometimes, walked hand in hand under the name of religion. I was thinking, at the moment, of the ancient American religion, in which the universal god was the sun. In it, so much that is beautiful and good is allied to ghastly forms of human sacrifice. But you are a student, and perhaps know as much as I do on this subject.""I am rather vague," said the doctor, "about the special form of worship to which you refer.""Well, you see," replied Carlisle, "they taught the people to be peaceful, to bear meekly their injuries and to rely upon God's mercy. They exhorted their followers to feed the poor, they practised confession, and received absolution. The chief exhortation of their confessor was: 'Clothe the naked, whatever privation it may cost thee, cherish the sick for they are the image of God.' In the same exhortation the penitent is urged to instantly procure a slave for sacrifice to the deity. This to be followed by the horrible practice of eating the sacrificed, in the belief that God was identified with the victim, and sacrificed Himself in the one who was slain. They abhorred cannibalism in any other form, but when thus eating human flesh, believed it was a means of partaking the body of God. As lately as 1486, at the dedication of the temple to Huitzilopochtli, seventy thousand human beings, collected during its building, were sacrificed in its honour.""It is almost impossible," said the doctor, "to realise such a scene of horror. Seventy thousand human creatures butchered as a consecration ceremony! But probably the introduction of Christianity to such people was a simple matter. They merely required the belief that the great sacrifice once offered was sufficient and final. In the Clothian worship, you remember, the departed spirit received every attention lest it should wreak its vengeance on the living. Thus a man's wife, cook, and horse were killed to bear him company.""To me," replied Carlisle, "the more modern religions form a fascinating study. I love the character of Confucius, the Sage, in the original religion of China. He was indeed the soul of wisdom, inspired by the love of mankind. I like his teaching that the spirits of men continue in possession of their faculties after their life on earth, exercising an influence upon the world. Perhaps this theory is particularly acceptable to me because of my experience; I am always so sure that the spirit of one dead ministers to me day and night. Also I like the belief that there is no purgatory or hell. There is a charm, too, in Shintoism, with its germ of hero-worship. You find so much simplicity in this creed, no blind faith, but a desire for knowledge. It merely teaches charity, kindness, and justice to all, with purity of thought and deed. As it knows neither paradise nor hell, unlike other religions, it ignores any form of bribery, with the object of securing the goodwill of its gods.""Yes," replied the doctor, "some of its old ideas are modernised now in apparently new fangled faiths like Christian Science. I am right, am I not, in thinking that forms of prayer are considered unnecessary in Shintoism, and to frame a wish without uttering it was regarded as sufficient?"Carlisle nodded assent."Most Shintoists," he replied, "content themselves with turning to the sun in the early morning, rubbing their hands slowly and bowing. They have sunshine enough in Japan to ensure their always seeing this heavenly light. But that sounds childish compared to the deeper beliefs of Buddhism, with its poetical faith that what we have been, makes us what we are. It certainly inculcates exemplary morals for the benefit of future generations. It is a religion which breathes of soft and tender love towards all beings that have life, love far reaching, grown great, in which no trace of anger or ill will can exist."He spoke dreamily, and the doctor saw how deeply absorbed was his mind in the various subjects of which he had written."Does it not strike you as strange, Carlisle," he replied, "that such a beautiful idea should have been founded upon the doctrine of impermanence, and be altogether independent of the belief in an everlasting individual soul? Even men of no particular creed have a certain rooted faith that their soul must live on, yet this great religion which has influenced more people than Christianity ever reached, while laying down the scheme of a perfect life, takes away the hope of a reward hereafter. Buddhism may be summed up as just one great unselfish thought for others, the only religion which bids a man trust himself alone, and calls upon him to govern, control, and form himself. A tranquil and perfect mind here is the goal of the Buddhist. How different from Hinduism, in which the whole world is a delusion! Their collection of rites, beliefs, traditions, and mythologies propagated by their priests, has always seemed to me far too intricate to follow. Have you touched on Sufiism, that mystic Persian faith?""Strangely enough," replied Carlisle, "I was writing of it to-day, trying to depict its extreme quietude. In these busy days of rush and hurry it is rather refreshing to turn to a system in which a renunciation of worldly hopes, and a passionate longing for close communion with God is the main note. I quoted from the Masnavi a description of their belief as to the soul: 'I died from the mineral and became a plant. I died from the plant, and reappeared in the form of an animal. I died from the animal, and became a man. Wherefore then should I fear? When did I grow less by dying? Next time I shall die from the man that I may grow the wings of an angel. Once more shall I wing my way above the angels, I shall become that which entereth not into the imagination. Verily unto Him do we return.'""And when," said the doctor, "you have waded through all these strange fancies and ideas, I wonder what conclusion you will come to. Do any of these religions appear satisfying?"Carlisle shook his head."No," he replied, "I have found nothing better than the faith which passed me by in early youth, because in my pride I thought I could do without God. Now I turn again with a sense of relief to the Christian religion, seeing that all the plain teachings of Christ can be embodied in the one word, love. Religion which has love for its root, seems open to no controversy. Perhaps you left your Church because you saw the law of love trampled under foot by the law of force triumphant in the Vatican. You could not be tied down to mere mechanical observance and outward forms. I feel that if all the good men's souls could be released from the paltry divisions of sect, they would make a really powerful Christian community. I should have no hesitation in becoming a member of such a Church. To belong, however, to any one of the present systems so bitterly opposed in their forms and ceremonies, is impossible to my nature. Perhaps it is necessary for the mass of people to be bound by certain formulae, but they have not been favoured with a glimpse of the other world. For that I must bless do Malincourt to the end of my days."The doctor smiled."At least," he said, "you are carrying out Christ's teaching as to the treatment of those who despitefully use you.""My friend," replied Carlisle, "I am fulfilling that commandment, by forgiving you and Madame de Malincourt for dragging me back to this world. The madman proved my best friend unconsciously; but my sane well-wishers imprisoned me here, where I must remain in penal servitude till the last call re-unites me to the woman I love."CHAPTER XXVIBETTY had met Sir Lowther alone by appointment. He still treated her as a trusted confidante, and now as they talked over Julia's future he unfolded a plan which certainly surprised his listener."I am not going to risk anything at the last moment," he said. "If I were to tell Julia the whole truth, she might become hysterical and lose all her faith in me. I shall marry her first and confess afterwards. She knows the date is settled for that momentous morning when we sign our names at the registry office. At the eleventh hour I shall tell her that my brother has died and I have come into the title. She won't have time to ask any questions, and once she is Lady Ormsley I shall make a clean breast of everything. Don't you agree with me that is the safest plan?"Betty puckered her brow; from the very first she hated all this deceit."I am afraid," she said, "if I were in Julia's shoes I should be simply furious at having been made a fool of by the man I loved. I don't know even if the glamour of a titled marriage would calm me down under such circumstances. Perhaps, however, I am not a good judge, because I don't know the meaning of a whole-hearted devotion. It must be something very wonderful, which outsiders cannot understand.""I think in this case," replied the man, "it includes the virtue of forgiveness. Julia will feel she must, as my wife, accept me under any circumstances, even though I appear a very black sheep in her eyes. It is woman's mission to be kind, and she has the tenderest heart in all the world. I shall spend the rest of my life trying to make up to her for my short-comings in the past; but I see you are smiling, Betty, at the thought of my making a good resolve."Betty checked her smile, and then broke into a merry laugh."Well, I must say, you are a queer mixture she declared. "There was a time when I thought you were about the worst man I had ever met, and that was saying a good deal. Now I must own you have proved my best friend, and somehow I don't feel really frightened for Julia. She is a lady to her finger tips, and you won't blush for her when you take her about and introduce her to your friends. I suppose Society will not ask too many questions if your pretty young bride entertains sufficiently, for lots of the best known people have histories now-a-days. We have been so hidden away, I can't see how they could prove anything against her. She has gone to be fitted now for her wedding dress, quite a simple affair in your favourite shade of blue. She wouldn't wear white, she declared it would be ridiculous mockery. White is the bride's emblem of purity, so Julia says, and you know how sensitive she is."Frederick Reece thought, as he listened to Betty's words, how greatly she had changed since living under Julia's influence. The very expression of her face was different, and he knew she had decided never to go back to the old life of degradation. In recognition of her services he bought her an annuity, which placed her beyond the cruel grip of poverty."I should like," she said, "to thank you again for your generosity. You can't think what it means to me, to feel that I am safe, and can hold up my head to the end of my days. I am not afraid of any troubles or illness which may come, I was only frightened of falling back into that hateful trap which grips so fast when you are in its clutches. You will laugh when I tell you that I am getting rather bitten with Julia's philanthropic schemes. When we part, I am going to help in some rescue work, because I think I shall know how to talk to the girls who have gone astray. Don't imagine I shall be a hypocrite. I shan't keep anything back, so it will be easy enough to point a moral. I always liked women better than men; I think it will be just grand to try and do something for them."Frederick Reece wished her luck, wondering if the good he had wrought for Betty would compensate in a small degree for the lives he injured during his thoughtless career."What has become of the recent Lady Ormsley?" she asked, suddenly curious as to the fate of the woman whose marriage had proved such a failure."Oh! she is now Mrs.. Guy Stafford," he replied coldly. "They have remained abroad ever since the scandal, but I suppose at some time they will reappear, when the story has begun to die down.""I guess," said Betty, "she is a deal happier than when she was with you. All that time you were hanging round Julia, she must have fretted her heart out; I often used to pity her.""You always jump at conclusions, Betty," he declared. I daresay you wasted a lot of your sympathy, but I can't explain matters, it would take too long. Go back to Julia now, I suppose when we meet again it will be on that happy occasion when the fulfilling of a human law wipes out the iniquity of the past."Betty shook her head, and spoke in her new role of moralist."It isn't the law will do it," she said. "You must spend the rest of your life over that little job, but I don't think you'll fail. The Frederick Reece I used to know will be dead and buried. I shall just be prepared to watch and admire Sir Lowther Ormsley, the good husband and the straight citizen. If I laugh sometimes, it won't hurt you; but there! one mustn't laugh when thinking of a dead man."The great morning had arrived and Julia was up early."I hardly slept a wink last night," she told Betty. "Somehow I felt as if this day would never come. The last week has seemed even longer than when I was finishing my term of imprisonment in the asylum. I was so thankful the doctor could truthfully assure Fred there was not the smallest possibility of a relapse now. I don't believe I have once used the name of Reece without blushing, even in shops sometimes I could hardly say the words, I was so conscious of my shame. When I saw it written on a letter I used always to remember it was a he, and felt sorry Fred had so often to write what was untrue. In other ways he has always seemed so truthful and honest. It hurt me to think I was making him what he ought never to have been. But after to-day we can sweep away pretences, I feel like one who is born again, it will be so wonderful to look the world squarely in the face. I am never going to brood on the past, I have promised Fred to blot it out. We shall live in the present and the future, they matter so much more. You can't think, Betty, how I long to go to church next Sunday. I shall walk in just like other people, without feeling that sickening sense of hypocrisy which makes worship so difficult when you are hugging your sin."Betty flung up her hands and waved them dramatically in the air, as if she were trying to shake herself free from a cloud of dust."Don't raise the old ghosts," she cried cheerfully. "Let us be rid of them once and for ever. I could go on grizzling, couldn't I, about my little adventures? But you and I, Julia, are both undergoing a kind of moral spring-cleaning. I shall be a spinster to the end of my clays, but a jolly happy one, with an independent income. I am so proud of that, I swell out my chest every time I speak of it. You, on the other hand, will be the godly matron, with just enough passionate humanity about you to keep your husband a devoted slave. My word! how that dress suits you! I suppose you will have a maid to do you up at the back when you become a lady of fashion."Certainly Julia looked her sweetest in the gown which set off every line of her girlish figure."You would be like a piece of Dresden china," Betty continued, "if your face were not so animated. Happiness does more for the complexion than all the cosmetics. Mr. Reece will have just cause to be proud of his bride."Frederick Reece came to fetch them both, and the three drove chatting and laughing happily to the building where so many fates had been sealed. Just as they stepped from the motor-landaulet, the man whispered his surprising piece of news into Julia's ear, feeling it was too late now for her to ask many questions."I didn't want to tell you before," he said, "but you are not going to be Mrs. Reece after all."For a moment she turned pale and caught her breath. The houses in the common-place street seemed whirling round, she stared at him with dazed eyes.Quickly he put her out of her suspense."No," he continued, "for the poor brother of whom I told you has passed away. I have inherited his title, instead you will become Lady Ormsley."A deep flush crept over Julia's face, as in silent emotion she pressed her lover's hand."Oh! Fred," she murmured, "I am so sorry for your loss. Why didn't you tell me before, you know I don't read the papers.""I didn't want anything to sadden this day," he answered in a voice which held no note of mourning. "I only mentioned it now because you have to take a different name. Betty knew about it, I told her last week."Miss Brown nodded with rather a curious expression, she was a little uncertain as to how the he would appear when the full facts were revealed."I suppose," said Julia, "all that sad affair about his wife preyed on his mind and proved too much for him. Oh! Frederick, is it possible under these new circumstances, that you would rather not marry me? If so, I will go back now and never say a word of reproach, however much it hurts I shall understand."He smiled into her eyes, and his face had never looked so full of love and confidence."Little woman," he whispered, as he led her through the door, "do you think I would give you up for a king's ransom?"It was certainly a very brief and business-like affair, but Julia was in such a whirl of excitement, so transported from the mundane atmosphere of the office, she could not have felt more awed had she been married with a full cathedral service.As they signed their names, she turned suddenly to her husband in order to point out a mistake."You were thinking so much of your poor brother, you have signed Lowther Ormsley, instead of Frederick Ormsley."He had expected the remark, and merely motioned to her to be silent."It's all right," he said under his breath. "I will explain afterwards,"Puzzled by his air of mystery, Julia left the office, wondering what it could all mean. It seemed impossible to believe she was really the wife of a baronet, when once she sheltered beneath this same man's roof as a fugitive from the streets with theft upon her soul.Betty bade them good-bye on the pavement, glad to escape before the confession took place.As she waved her handkerchief, she murmured to herself, "I wonder what sort of a time he is going to have now the mask must be dropped! It will be a relief to give up all this double dealing. I, for one, am thankful to be clear of it without a scene."The newly married couple were driving in a closed car to Brighton, and now Julia turned wide eyes of enquiry to her bridegroom."There was some mystery," she said with conviction. "You didn't want me to ask about the name before that clerk. Fred, what does it all mean?"She was leaning back on the cushions looking a little faint. He noticed how quickly she breathed, and let down the window that the air might play on her face and neck."Don't worry, dear heart," he said. "You have taken me now for better or worse, and the first favour I ask of my wife is a gift which she can give instantly, let us hope, without too great an effort. You know the old saying, 'all men are sinners,' and I come to you burdened with the weight of my own iniquity. I want you to try and understand why I have sinned, but it will be a long story to which you must listen patiently, and without criticism, until it is all finished. Then I shall throw myself on my wife's mercy, and trust to her generosity and sweet compassion."Though Julia little suspected what was coming, she felt instinctively this was the moment to be strong. The man who relied oil leer for his happiness was in some trouble, He looked to her to lift the weight, and make his path clear. He was asking some gift at her hands when he had given her all. Inwardly she vowed nothing would make her fail him, nothing should weaken her love.Sir Lowther Ormsley had always possessed a plausible tongue. He had a wonderful way of gilding over his own short-comings. Very cleverly he unfolded the history of his past deceit. It was even more difficult than he had anticipated, and now and again he took refuge in laying stress on his human weakness, feigning greater penitence than he really felt for his underhand deeds. Always he painted himself as a victim of fate, a sufferer who must be pitied, a man who needed the presence of a woman like herself to steer his barque into a safe harbour.As the bride listened, a host of uncontrollable feelings battled in her mind; love and pity always rising to the surface of that turbulent tide. As Lowther neared the end of his narrative he knew he had won the day. Julia was almost glad she had something to forgive, since he raised the woman he might well have despised, to share a life capable of great influence. Wealth and position were now hers, and instead of Sir Lowther Ormsley being dead, it was Frederick Reece who had passed to the realms where all things are forgotten."I must think it all over quietly," she said, as putting her hand to her forehead she tried to unravel the tangled skein. "I had such faith in Betty, I can hardly believe she was deceiving me all the time.""Only through love," he declared. "We were both in league to make you happy, surely such a goal was worth striving for, and this is the last act of the play. In the future, as husband and wife, you and I will be really one. No secret shall ever come between us, and now I have yet another request to make, Don't think it all over; just forget it, as you banished from your mind the ugly remembrances of your recent illness. The ashes of the past mean little to us to-day. We are travelling on to our golden future; won't you face it smiling?"Julia placed her hand in his, and shaking off that sudden mood of despondency, turned a radiant face to the man she freely forgave."Lowther," she said, and the name sounded strangely in her ears, "I should be the most ungrateful woman in the world if I let a single cloud mar our sunshine. I won't fail you on our first real journey to happiness. We are together, and now we belong to each other in the best sense of the word, shame is left behind. I'm glad I've one little virtue left, I'm glad I've something to forgive!"CHAPTER XXVIIThe Staffords were spending the spring in the south of France. Their future plans were still vague, and both shrank from the thought of returning to London for the season. Wherever they went it seemed to Eva she was known. At the time of her marriage to Sir Lowther she had been boomed in the illustrated papers as one of the most beautiful women in Europe. Now she wished fervently that she had escaped the glaring light of publicity. Certainly the stately head held itself as proudly as before, only there was sometimes a look of defiance in the eyes, an expression in which a shade of fear mingled.Though she would not acknowledge the fact to herself, she was always looking out with something of dread for old acquaintances, to avoid meeting them face to face. Already she had undergone the humiliation of being passed with a cold stare, and of hurrying up side streets when some figure loomed in the distance.She would never acknowledge to Guy that this hurt her at all, for she knew he was keenly sensitive. In his eyes she was a type of perfect womanhood, at whose feet all should do homage. He hated to think he had marred the edifice so strong and unassailable, until he laid siege to its sanctity.Eva always told herself that his extraordinary tenderness and love made up for everything she had lost, but during the past year the consequences of her act clearly showed that the sinner can never suffer alone.Guy, who she knew enjoyed the distraction of gambling, suggested their spending a few days at Monte Carlo. The cosmopolitan atmosphere of the place with its strange medley of notorious folk, was rather soothing to Eva's mood."Everyone here seems to have a history," she said to Guy. "Or if they don't possess such a thing, it is invented for them. We are quite in the fashion.""I wish," he replied, "you would throw off all depressing thoughts, and only remember that you are my wife, the wife of whom I am so intensely proud. Don't you imagine I thrilled when I saw every eye in the Sports Club turned towards you the other night? In all that bizarre crowd you shone out like a star."He thought as he spoke of the brilliantly attired figures seated round the gambling tables; women eager to display their charms, and vie with each other in the wearing of costly gems. There an English duchess was seated next a famous French dancer. Royalty rubbed shoulders with commoners, yet even the most fevered gambler noticed the entrance of Eva Stafford. She was the tallest woman in the room, and certainly the most regal looking. He would not believe that the past scandal lowered her in the eyes of those curious beholders."We will dine at the Club to-night," he said, "and have another little flutter afterwards. No wonder I lost, for they say if you are lucky in love you are unlucky at the tables. The gay scenes will divert your thoughts, and bring back the old light-heartedness which I remember when first I met you in your débutante days.""I wish," said Eva, "we could keep our young feelings right till the end of time. If one could only be a joyful girl at heart after weathering the stormy seas of life! I suppose they are bound to sober one a little, and then, of course, I am worrying about my mother. I am afraid she will never be really strong again, that nervous breakdown has changed her completely."The moment Eva had said the words, she regretted their utterance. Guy, she knew, must feel the part he had played in causing this distressing illness."The air of Mentone will do her good," he said in a reassuring tone. "I am sure she enjoyed your visit yesterday, and she was wonderfully nice to me. I thought she had decided never to see me again, but I suppose she changed her mind to make things easier for you.""It isn't quite so bad for her now, since our marriage," said Eva, not really sharing his view that the invalid would improve. "Of course she is rather old to start nerves, we can't expect her to recover quickly like a young person."Eva would gladly have stayed quietly in their sitting-room at the hotel that evening, but fearing such a suggestion might disappoint Guy, she went with him to the Sports Club Restaurant.The small room was crowded, and they had the greatest difficulty to get a table. As they moved to the seats reserved for them in a brightly lighted corner, they passed a table at which the Marchioness of Ailstair was entertaining a dinner party.Eva did not see her until she was in close range of those cold hard eyes. Lady Ailstair looked her full in the face with a withering glance of scorn. For a moment it seemed her size increased, she drew herself up and inflated her nostrils as though some contaminating influence filled the air. She paused in the middle of a conversation, struck dumb by the presence of the woman she had hoped never to see again.Eva hastened her steps, vexed to find herself blushing. A deep red colour crept from her cheek to her neck, and Stafford winced as he noticed the flush."Sit here," he said, placing a chair with its back to Lady Ailstair's table."Did you see her?" asked Eva, wondering if he recognised Lowther's aunt."Yes," he said, "it is about the only giddy thing she does, a yearly visit to Monte Carlo, but I did not know she was here now.""I expect she is staying at Beaulieu with her favourite Princess," said Eva, remembering the year before she and Lowther were asked to join a similar house party.Some of the guests at the marchioness's table had no idea that Mrs. Stafford was once related to Lady Ailstair, and little realising the subject was unpleasant, began discussing the graceful figure which had just passed them."I noticed her last night," said one. "It was so refreshing to see a beautiful face here without the customary make-up. She looks like some pure lily, such a contrast to the others."The speaker was checked by a whispered comment on his left."You must not talk of her there," came in an undertone from one of Lady Ailstair's woman friends. "She behaved disgracefully, and though I believe the man has married her since, it is rather improbable that she will ever be received again. She treated her husband shamefully, deserting him so soon after marriage, happily the poor fellow has found a good woman to console him. The second Lady Ormsley is the quiet retiring type, very philanthropic, gives drawing-room meetings, and works amongst the poor. Everyone speaks well of her, although she was quite a nonentity so far as family is concerned. Just some little orphan he picked up in the country. I suppose he preferred a bread and butter miss after the very rapid American."When ten o'clock arrived and the doors of the gambling rooms were opened, the Staffords waited until Lady Ailstair's party left the restaurant."If they are playing roulette," said Guy, "we will go to the baccarat room. It is easy enough to avoid them in the crowd."Lady Ailstair had reserved a seat for herself near her favourite croupier, and very solemnly settled a little pile of gold on the table in front of her, but for once she was not thinking of the game. Her mind had undergone a fierce shock of resentment, as she took Eva in from head to foot during that moment when look challenged look."The creature has any amount of bravado," she thought, "sailing in with the air of a queen, with features saintly enough to grace a Madonna. It will be simply disgraceful if she is ever received again. I shall take care to make it known that any who seek her acquaintance will never pass my doors. Probably she only shows a smiling face to the world; under the surface she must always be conscious of her past degradation. I really hope I shall have a chance of cutting her quite often. I seem fated to meet objectionable people this evening, I just passed that uppish Mrs. Marsh, who was brought to my house last season. She tried to stop and speak, but I showed her she was not remembered."While Lady Ailstair inwardly criticised these two offenders, Eva and the little woman from Eaton Square had just greeted each other with genuine pleasure."It is delightful to see you again," said Mrs. Marsh, looking with admiring eyes at the friend she had so nearly called Lady Ormsley on the spur of the moment. "Are you going to play, or can we have a chat? It seems ages since our talk that afternoon when you so kindly called on me."And when you returned the call, I had already flown," said Eva with a strange smile. "No, I don't want to gamble, I would ever so much rather talk to you."They walked boldly down the roulette room, passing Lady Ailstair who muttered something about "birds of a feather," and seated themselves in a cosy alcove shielded by a yellow brocade curtain. There all was quiet and reposeful, even the atmosphere of smoke had not so thickly penetrated to that sheltered spot. For a moment they were silent, each wondering how the world had treated the other."You know I have married again," said Eva at last, "I am much happier as Mrs. Stafford.""Yes," replied Mrs. Marsh, "I can see that. Perhaps you sometimes laugh at me for the advice you did not follow, I'm afraid it was a great impertinence, and I want to ask you to forgive me."There was a very pretty penitence about Mrs. Marsh, as she looked up from under her long eyelashes, genuinely admiring the woman who showed no outward sign of all she had passed through.Eva pressed her hand suddenly and now it seemed as if a mask fell from her smiling face."Of course I never laughed at the things you said which have proved so true. I see now what a really good friend you meant to be, and I shall never forget the pains you took to warn me against my fate."Mrs. Marsh dared not ask if Eva regretted her lost position, only her face filled with enquiry, and Mrs. Stafford answered the unspoken thought."Anything I may suffer personally," she said, "is worth it to be with Guy. He and I are so absolutely one, that if it were not for the Nemesis which must always follow, it would be heaven on earth, this life of ours together. The fact one does not realise, is the after effect of a wrong action on others. Sin must always hurt those you love and want to shield. When my mother heard Iliad left Lowther, the shock was so great she fainted for hours. When she came round, she refused to believe it, saying if the world told her so, she could never credit the fact that her daughter was bad. She got all sorts of strange fancies, imagining I had been murdered and my father was concealing the fact, so at last I had to write and tell her I was with Guy. Then all her physical powers broke down, and she became the victim of a dreadful nervous illness which has left her partially paralysed. my father might have forgiven my hot-headed action, but he cannot forgive my having caused my mother such suffering. He knows she will never be really better, and when we meet, his every word and look is a perpetual reproach. I do not regret he is leaving his money away from me to various nephews and nieces, Guy has plenty for us both, but I feel the loss of his love keenly. Before, you see, I was suffering myself. The pain became unbearable, I was afraid of it, I could no longer endure the daily heart-ache. It was so difficult to give up desire and sacrifice self when the fever raged. Only in calmer moments one realises how splendid victory would have been. As life advanced, I could have looked back with a sense of freedom, knowing I had done right. Now, the canker of remorse must always underlie my outward happiness, in a love which was bought so dearly. I could not speak like this to anyone but you, because I feel you understand."Mrs. Marsh looked strangely moved, she knew so well just how Eva was feeling."Yes," she replied, "it does hurt when it comes home to one like that. I am indeed sorry about your mother, but surely, in time she may recover?"Eva shook her head."I am afraid not, the doctors think she will just hang on to life for perhaps a year, but every day she grows weaker. Then another thing hurts me rather more than I can say. I had a favourite maid who came to me when I was a girl. She was just about my own age, and always lived a very good life up to the time of my elopement. While we were wandering about, passing that difficult period before I had a legal right to the name of Stafford, I wrote to this woman to ask if she cared to come to me. In return I received a long and very strange letter. She told me it was impossible for her to re-enter my service, because, to use her own language, she had got into trouble. She made it very clear that her lapse was the result of my example. She thought there could he no harm in certain practices if a lady like myself, to whom she had always looked up, could break the moral code. Evidently the man had deserted her, and she was left to face her trial alone. Of course I sent her financial help, but in this case I felt it was very inadequate. That was lust one more result of the way my sin affected others.""I think," declared Mrs. Marsh a little hotly, "it was very mean of her to lay it at your door. Perhaps she only wrote like that to win your sympathy, I do not see that you are responsible for her folly."Eva shrugged her shoulders, Mrs. Marsh's words brought no comfort."Oh! but I was," she declared. "We are always affecting the weaker people round us. I didn't think of that when you pleaded with me at our last meeting. I am waiting to meet someone who has done what we did, without ever regretting the daring step. I think I shall wait a long time.""Yes," murmured Mrs. Marsh softly, "I think you will wait for ever."CHAPTER XXVIII"YOUR prayer has been answered," said Velvein. "Now that you have received the gifts of strength, purity, and knowledge, with power to soar to the radiant city of praise and peace, this earth love will keep you back. The waiting may seem long, and the years dreary, but it will be a trial of endurance, which makes the angels just a little envious of human love. Its power is so vast, that even their limitless vision cannot reach to the height of mortal passion. Before that we bow our heads, acknowledging that only God in His high heaven knows the depth and breadth of such emotion. Your lessons are over, I can teach you nothing more. You are, oh! so different from the Suzanne de Malincourt from whom Hugh Carlisle parted, and he, too, will be different when he rejoins you.""In what way?" asked Suzanne a little nervously. "I don't want him to be hardened by the world. I should like him to come to me just as he was when we parted in the dungeon at Sainte Bruyère."Velvein shook his head, but there was nothing sad in the expression of his eyes."Hugh Carlisle will have advanced since then," he said. "Wisdom has been his companion, though he has shut himself away from the outer world which might have taught him much. He has learnt one great truth, he believes absolutely in the future life. Nothing can shake his faith. He has entered into argument with Atheists and freethinkers and these discussions have left him with his feet planted still more firmly on the path of conviction. He had an ad-vantage over them, his temporary death accounted for much. Now he envies those who pass, even more than those who have happiness, love, and dear ones ever round them on earth. Since you left, the weary term of waiting has seemed like one long trouble with none of those pauses that men call joys. Other people suffer bereavements which time invariably cures. They have to console them a few resignations that they call peace, and a few ties which they call love. He is divorced from the human side of existence, and while his heart cries for you, his reason tells him he must wait until his soul is freed from the shackles of mortality.""Perhaps," said Suzanne, "my thoughts will help him. I can be caring all the time, surely then he will not feel alone. Perhaps I can help other people, too. It seems to me that the men and women on earth are all miserable at heart because they feel themselves condemned to death. If only their idea of death could be changed! They never think of it as freedom, the reaching out to a wider existence. So many remind me of my youth, in the wicked waste of frittered lives which continues from century to century. Many die having done no good, and few could even write down what they hoped to do for the advancement of the world."Velvein bent over her, and she knew that he was blessing her before he left."You have judged rightly," he murmured. "But if you could go back now and tell your friends of all your spirit experiences they would not believe you, not if one rose from the dead. We are told this, but we should know it even if we had not been told. Each creature of earth must wrestle alone till he is broken by all conquering death. Then the shattered casket can be buried in the lumber room, while that which is pure and undefiled floats clear of the world's contaminating influence. Say a word of encouragement to those who flutter down into the depths of the Gulf before your very eyes. Point to the distant light, the signal of your outstretched hand will be like a beacon of hope on the dark seas of despair. Good-bye, Suzanne, we shall meet again some day, that will be permitted. I shall seek you in the distant city when you and Hugh Carlisle have passed the gates hand in hand. Then you will know the mysteries which are far too sweet for words to tell, joys I may not even breathe to you until they are poured upon you from the very fount of holy ecstasy. At least your ears are open now. As you wait and watch you will catch the music, and as it reaches you it will draw you with a fierce longing. There will be moments when perhaps you may wish you had never heard the name of Hugh Carlisle; then remember your prayer, and simply say 'I have brought this upon myself.' Some people ask for favours, and blame God when they are granted. Often they are not far-sighted enough to see that the very benefit they crave must prove a trial in the end.""If I suffer, it will be gladly," murmured Suzanne, gazing at the radiant countenance of her guide as if to photograph its beauty on her vision. "When I falter, I shall think of the look in your face to-day, Velvein. I shall remember your words, especially the words which have made me so proud, about the angels being almost envious of our human love. You don't know what it means to be able to sacrifice myself for the sake of the one on earth. When he sleeps and dreams, perhaps, my spirit will whisper in his ear: 'I am waiting! I am waiting!' That will surely give him courage, that will make him confident of finding me. Human interference so often parts lovers on earth, but man is powerless to divide spirits in the air. God is more merciful than man, that is why Hugh and I will be re-united."Now Velvein stood before her, drawn up to his full height, with his wings outstretched."I never knew before," she thought, "that his wings were so great."They seemed to grow before her eyes and strange opalesque colours appeared on their surface, as if a thousand shining jewels glistened in the morning sun. He was moving away, still with his face towards her, his eyes riveted upon her kneeling form. He said no word, only his whole attitude expressed farewell. His face seemed to glow with the knowledge and the love which passes understanding, the love of the Master reflected in the eyes of His servant; the knowledge of Heaven radiating the features of the one who had seen."Velvein," she cried. "I thought you were going back to earth, why are you flying towards the magnet? You make me want to come, yet, I would not take back my prayer if I could. When you have gone I shall feel resigned.""I go to receive my orders," he called, as he floated away. "Good-bye, Suzanne. When we meet again your wings may be greater and brighter than mine."He rose like a flash of lightning in the air, then all was still.Suzanne crouched by the yawning Gulf, shadows crept round her, she felt terribly alone. When Velvein left her before, Hugh Carlisle was her companion, now no spirit spoke to her own. A paralysing sensation of loss flooded her soul. Was it to be thus, for all the long spell of time till the loved one should be released?She lay with her face to the ground, and now the bitterness of death seemed to engulf her. Cut off from Heaven and earth, even the distant music was drowned by the pitiful sounds which reached her listening ears—the moaning of souls which had fallen into the darkness of the pit.Suzanne's sense of loneliness soon faded away, as crowding to the Gulf came great throngs of disembodied souls from every corner of the globe. She watched them at first with intense curiosity, smiling as the victorious ones floated triumphantly away, and weeping as the feeble ones sank before her eyes. Then as time wore on with extraordinary slowness, apathy crept over her, and sometimes a wild longing would seize her to spread her wings and follow in the wake of the joyful spirits on their homeward flight."I must try not to feel," she thought. "I must make myself like one of the rocks on the brink of the abyss. No one has any time to stop and speak to me, they only wonder a little why I remain when all the others hurl themselves forward, drawn by the dazzling light to try the strength of their wings. Just a few call to me, but their voices mean nothing. I have cut myself off, I mustn't complain."Suzanne knew, however long the trial seemed, she must never for a moment relax her vigilant watching. Though countless millions passed her, the one she sought might come at any minute. What if he floated by without observing her! Then she would be left for all time, forgotten and alone.It was easy to pray as she turned her face towards the dazzling pinnacles in the distance. Prayer took an entirely different form from the feeble worship of earth. Every word she uttered seemed to echo and re-echo till it was taken up by vast pæans of praise. But for these angel voices, and the distant vision of glory, she could not have endured her lot.Often she thought of Velvein, remembering the soul he would have to guard on earth before they met again. What a comforter he had proved when first she felt herself severed from mortal existence! His guiding hand made everything easy, even the stern education of her earth-bound sphere, with its daily lesson of suffering, which brought forth fruits of sympathy and understanding.Now the world she had left appeared strangely small, compared with the wonderful spirit existence in the deathless realms of eternity. As yet she could not gauge the joys beyond, though she understood much of the sorrow and progress in the Gulf of contrition. The souls in prison worked out their own salvation as they ate the bread of tears. The buried body meant nothing, only the buried soul mattered. She knew it was a school through which the evil ones must pass before they could be purified, and that hell meant the remorse they suffered for crimes committed on earth. She remembered Velvein's request, and always pointed to the glory beyond, when those who were fluttering down turned pitiful eyes in her direction.Sometimes they cried out words of excuse, "I knew not what I did! It was the fault of another! I never had a chance!"Suzanne covered her face as if with shame when she heard these excuses. She knew that a chance was given to every one, Velvein had proved that to her when he showed her the errors of earth. She also realised that only penitence could help them, and not self-justification.The little children who came laughing to the Gulf, bright-eyed and joyful, gave Suzanne exquisite moments of pleasure. It was so splendid to see the way these guiltless souls soared over the chasm, not noticing it was there. The eyes which had never beheld sin, and the hearts of innocence, were like sunbeams on a summer sea, knowing nothing of the ocean's treachery beneath, making the surface radiant by the perfect beauty of their presence.Suzanne had often wished since Velvein's departure that someone in the pressing multitude would pause a moment and speak a word. One day, just as she had almost ceased to hope she would ever recognise a friend, a spirit came suddenly to her side, as if knowing her well."I have met you before," said a voice. "I know you, and I want to thank you, for I never forgot your visit, I always hoped you would come to me again, but afterwards I only saw you in dreams, yet that helped me.""When did I come to you?" asked Suzanne in some surprise. She spoke with a glad note of welcome, though the one who addressed her appeared a stranger."I do not wonder that you cannot recognise me, for I must indeed be changed. It is wonderful to feel so free and light, without those clogging chains which bound me to a bed of pain. You stood by me one morning and soothed me, when my daughters, Isobel and Jane, had gone to rest, and I was quite alone in my sick room. Can you recall the hour? You gave me a sense of security I had never felt before. After your visit I always thought of those peaceful moments, and the promise they brought of future bliss.""Why!" exclaimed Suzanne. "Of course I remember now. Velvein took me to your cottage on the first morning of my pilgrimage with him. Your daughters were very tired, I tried to take their place. I wonder what they are doing now!"The voice at her side answered with a quaver."Just for a little while I hovered about my earthly home, and saw them reverently laying my old bones to rest. My daughters both looked relieved and almost happy. They talked to each other of future plans when they came back to the empty house from which a burden had been removed. I knew then how I had spoiled their lives, and it was bitter to feel I had been blind for so many years to my own shortcomings. I don't grudge them their happiness, I am glad they are not grieving for such an unworthy parent. When I see them again it will all be so different. Good-bye, little spirit of kindness, I must hurry on, for the light is calling me, and I think when I reach it I shall find the husband I loved. He was a good and true man; his last words to me came floating across this Gulf just now: 'We shall meet again.'"Suzanne watched anxiously to see the strength of the sufferer's wings. She remembered Velvein saying that those who paid the price of selfishness on earth, by human suffering, could sometimes fly straight to the entrance of the glorious rest.In a vast company of rejoicing souls the spirit of the bedridden mother drifted away, and Suzanne fancied it did not fall. She liked to think of Isobel and Jane reconstructing their lives in the country cottage."They will feel like released prisoners," thought Suzanne sympathetically. "Perhaps they will grow quite young again, and lose those tired lines about their eyes. I wonder she remembered me, it was such a passing moment, I had forgotten it completely."After that Suzanne was even more on the alert to recognise some passing spirit with whom she had formed a link on earth. The time wore on, and often weariness covered her like a cloud."Hugh," she thought, "how I must love you not to mind! I didn't know all you were to me until I prayed for these years of trial. Velvein said it would be counted like the time in your world. I suppose that is why it seems so long."She often noticed pitying glances cast in her direction by the many who pressed forward, eager to know their own destiny. They thought she was there as a punishment, little realising that her wings were daily growing to the strength of angels. Only an absolute sacrifice of self could have raised her to the high position of those angelic bodies which had never been contaminated by worldly existence.At last a spirit came who recognised Suzanne's strength. Suddenly she heard a familiar voice cry joyfully: "Oh! my darling, how bright and beautiful you are!"Looking up, she found herself face to face with Philippa de Malincourt."Mother," she cried, "Oh! mother, I am so glad you have come to me!"A radiant sense of love enveloped her. At last the mother and child were one in heart, mind and spirit. Each knew the future would be spent in a long and unclouded vision, where the bitterness of death could not divide them, and realising this, they smiled rapturously into each other's faces."Come, dear child," said Philippa, happily, "take my hand and we will press on together. See, our home is beyond, we must not waste time here in the shadows."Just for a moment Suzanne faltered, this was the hardest trial of all. Even now, if she willed, she could give up her mission, and hurry away with the mother who seemed to grudge even these few moments on the edge of the Gulf."I will come later," said Suzanne, steeling herself against this terrible temptation. "I prayed I might be allowed to wait here for Hugh Carlisle, and he has not passed yet. We shall find you together, mother dear, it will only be a moment of time for you, though for me, the hours are long and the years weary. It is my own choice. You always gave me my way on earth, you will not reproach me now, you will not be afraid to go alone.""Afraid!" cried Philippa's voice as if the word held little meaning. "It is all so beautiful, surely no one need fear. Do as you will, my child, but I must hasten on. Earthly love is sweet, but not so sweet as this.""You were so unselfish," said Suzanne. "I know you must fly above the pit into which some of the travellers sink. It is down there, perhaps you can hear the faint crying of the fallen ones?"But Philippa could not see the darkness to which Suzanne pointed."There is no pit," she said, and her eyes were riveted on the golden radiance towards which she stretched her eager, longing hands. "I can hear glorious music, songs so magical and new they draw one away like a spell. Come soon, Suzanne, I shall be there to greet you. God is very good."Suzanne covered her face with her wings and stifled the words which might have detained Philippa."Oh! mother, mother, mother!" she moaned. "If only I could have gone with you, and then come back for Hugh! You were so happy, you didn't seem to mind this separation, yet once you grieved for me so bitterly, I was all you wanted on earth.""But earth is not heaven," cried some passing voices, and Suzanne thought they jeered at her because she was shedding tears.She could not tell how long a period elapsed before she saw again a figure which seemed familiar. It came slowly to the edge of the Gulf as if feeble with a weight of sin. The shadows around it were dark, it was a bent misshapen form. She noticed it moved with hands outstretched as a blind man walks, and was apparently oblivious to the magnet towards which all souls were drawn.Instinctively Suzanne drew nearer, feeling this wandering spirit needed a friend. Then in a flash she recognised the identity. It was Réné, stained with crime, looking down into the depths below."Father," she whispered, "don't you know me?"He turned quickly at the sound of her voice, he was no longer the mad creature she had seen in the asylum, but sane and keenly aware of all that had happened in the past. He stretched out his arms and caught her to his heart; she felt like one in the grip of some terrible nightmare, stifled by a nameless horror from which she strove to wake."My little Suzanne," he groaned, "come with me. Don't fade away again, I cannot do without you."Now her bright spirit form slipped from his grasp, and left him standing alone with his hands beating the air.Quickly she asked him a question which rose instinctively to her lips."Are you penitent? Do you regret your deed at Sainte Bruyère?"He shook his head, and even as he did so the darkness around him increased."I would do it all again," he said, "for it was a grand revenge! The man who took you from me deserved his fate. I would not undo the past.""But Hugh Carlisle meant no harm," replied Suzanne, and her voice held a pleading note. "You made an innocent man suffer, you misjudged him, and in doing so you destroyed yourself."Réné looked suddenly towards the light, shading his eyes as though the radiance hurt him. He bent down, as if to catch the sorrowful sound of his fellow sinners, whose prayer for deliverance rose from the depths."I don't know what you are doing here, Suzanne," he said, "but if you will not come with me I must go on alone. I am looking for your mother, surely I shall find her soon!"Suzanne did not like to tell him his wish was hardly likely to be fulfilled, only she watched in horror as he hurled himself forward, and sank with extraordinary suddenness into the dark void where he must find repentance."Some day he may work his way to the surface," she thought, "when he sees his error and asks forgiveness. I wish I knew what the people down there are doing, but Velvein always told me I mustn't ask, Every day they climb a little nearer to the surface, they are given their opportunity, but the mystery is only known to themselves and God."Again she turned her face to the great white armies pressing forward, but the form of Hugh Carlisle was not among them, and a restless fever of longing seized her to hear his voice."Oh! for the touch of his hand," she sighed. "If life is long to him, this waiting is longer still for me."Then, as she felt her courage failing, she thought of her mother's happy face and the joy across the chasm."The music will be ours in time," she said, feeling as if she were addressing Hugh Carlisle. "Dearest, I will not falter. I wanted to wait for you, and I must be thankful. Sacrifice is a poor thing if you grumble and grow weary. Send me one thought, help me to smile at the passing figures. Oh! I am so sorry I forgot to point to the distant glory when father sank down. I will try and call a word of hope to him, if he hears my voice it may soften his heart, and in the valley of repentance make him forgive as he hopes to be forgiven."CHAPTER XXIXA DOCTOR came softly out of Hugh Carlisle's room, and spoke to a hospital nurse in the passage."He has not many hours to live, poor fellow," said the man who always pitied those who were about to die. "He has asked to see an old servant whom he tells me he pensioned off some years ago, that is to say if she is strong enough to come. I have promised to send a carriage for her, but please impress upon her when she arrives, not to make a scene. She must only stay with him a short time, just to say good-bye, and if she is at all hysterical, hurry her away at once.""What about his friend, Dr. Giraudet?" asked the nurse. "He was talking of him this morning.""He doesn't want me to send for him, as he is in Paris, but I am to write and give him particulars when the end comes. It is important he should know, Mr. Carlisle is leaving him some property."Everyone in the house was terribly concerned over the master's fatal illness. Only Hugh appeared perfectly calm as he lay propped up with pillows, gazing at the painting of a beautiful girl which hung on the wall facing his bed. This life-like picture of Suzanne had been brought to the house in Chelsea after Madame de Malincourt's death, by her special wish. It had never looked more human than now, as he saw it through the dim eyes of growing weakness. He was quite sure that the lips moved, and the lids with their long lashes played those same little tricks which he remembered in the days of his youth, when for a few brief hours Suzanne was all his own.His thoughts were strangely tranquil, for he was no longer in pain. The last operation it was possible to perform to arrest a deadly disease, had reduced him to a hopeless invalid more than a month ago. At last he felt his weary time of waiting was nearly at an end, and daily, as his body weakened, his spirit grew brighter and more at peace."I wonder," he thought, "if it was selfish for me to send for poor old Mrs. Holland. It will distress her to think this must be our last meeting on earth, but perhaps she would have fretted more if I had not given her the opportunity of a good-bye shake of the hand. She was always so devoted to my mother and loyal to myself, I'd rather she saw me alive than come here to mourn over my worthless remains."It seemed unnatural that through the long lapse of years which now made Hugh Carlisle a middle aged man, he had kept himself away from friends and society, never once returning to his old life. Few would miss him, and the nurses, who recognised the charm of this patient personality, marvelled at the dearth of enquiries.Mrs. Holland, who was now a very old woman, almost forgot her sorrow in boundless pride that the dear master had sent for her."It is just like his kind thoughtfulness," she said, "to let me take a farewell look at him now he knows he cannot recover. I should feel it dreadfully if I didn't know that my time here cannot be very long. It does seem hard he should be taken before me, but he never valued his life, and it is different when a man has a wife and family left to mourn him."Mrs. Holland looked changed since the days when she kept house so ably for the recluse. Her ample figure had wasted to half its size, her hair was snowy white, and her face deeply lined. No need to tell her not to make a scene, she had all her wits about her, and knew that the invalid must not be distressed.The professional nurse was quite impressed by her admirable self possession as she ushered her into the sick room."Dear Mr. Hugh," she said, seating herself by the bed and taking his hand with motherly fondness. "I can't thank you enough for letting me come, for I have been eating my heart out for a sight of you, this many a long day."He signed to the nurse to leave them, then turned to Mrs. Holland with an affectionate smile."You mustn't grieve," he said, "because I am quite happy."His voice sounded little changed despite his wasted form."You know who I am going to find," he continued, "all my hope is on the other side."He pointed to the picture, and Mrs. Holland bowed her head to signify assent. She could not trust herself to look up at the merry eyes in that girlish face. Already her tears were too near the surface, but she was determined not to break down."May it all be just as you wish, sir," she murmured softly. "It is good to feel we shall meet the loved ones; somehow to-day, I keep thinking of your dear mother.""Yes," he replied, "she will be there too. Perhaps, like most people, you occasionally feel a sudden wave of doubt about the future, it must be so for those who have never been given a glimpse of the spirit world. I am only going back to what I left all those years ago in that foreign tomb. It is rather foolish of me, but having once been buried alive, I've a horror of being put into a grave. I have left all directions for my cremation; the furnace will make short work of what is left, which matters so little after all."He saw Mrs. Holland's pained expression and felt sorry he had drifted on to such subjects. Speaking in a brighter vein, he asked after Jenny, and the mention of this favourite niece instantly brought a smile to Mrs. Holland's lips."Oh! she is wonderfully well, thank you, and so happily married. She is always a marvel to me, for it does seem strange she never got proud, being brought up so differently from the others. Though Jenny is quite the lady, with money of her own, she has always been kindness itself to Alfred and her younger sister. I suppose it is her nature to be like that, and then Madame de Malincourt trained her so splendidly. She misses that dear lady terribly, but she says she can still show her gratitude by proving herself all her second mother wished her to be. That was entirely your doing, sir. But for your kindness to Jenny as a child, she would never have met her benefactress.""It is a little difficult to say," replied Hugh Carlisle, "which of those two was really the benefactress. Madame de Malincourt did much for your niece but I venture to think Jenny did even more for her, at any rate it was an equal division. Sometimes one can do a kindness by accident. I never dreamt that the lonely woman, who had practically lost husband as well as child, would adopt Jenny when I took her to that house.""She will be so touched you asked after her, sir," said Mrs. Holland, glancing nervously at the clock, since the nurse had told her to remain only a few minutes. "I expect I am tiring you, I know you must not talk much."Hugh took her hand between both his own, and pressed it fervently."Bless you, dear old friend," he said. "Good-bye, just for a little while."He smiled, and she had never seen his face so radiant before. He was like a man looking forward to some great event, destined to brighten his whole career and lead him to a desired goal.Mrs. Holland could not speak, but just kissed the wasted hands passionately, and hurried from the room with a desperate effort to control her tears."Isn't he wonderfully brave?" said the nurse, as she supported the weeping woman downstairs."He would tell you that all his bravery was needed to live. Since quite a young man he has wanted to die," Mrs. Holland replied. "It was a wonderful test of devotion all those years, the way he never forgot the pretty young lady who should have been his wife. There are not many like that, they say time heals most wounds, but to every rule there's an exception, and Mr. Carlisle is one of them. He looked so weak, as if he might flicker out at any moment. I suppose when one is wasted to a skeleton, and so feeble, dying comes easier. It was that first death which meant so much to him, when he was a young, strong man in the prime of life. They might have left him alone! It has been his endless regret that Madame de Malincourt and Dr. Giraudet found him at Sainte Bruyère, but he has forgiven them now. I never saw such a look of sweetness before on the face of a dying man.""Hugh Carlisle! Hugh Carlisle! When will you come?"Suzanne murmured the words as she kept vigil with undaunted patience."If there are many more years to wait, I may grow so tired that I cannot watch any longer, instead, he will have to look for me. Surely he will recognise me, even if my head is bent, and my figure lies crouched by the rock. I shall hear him say:—'That must be my little Suzanne!' for he whispered, when our spirits met, that love was eternal, and must find its affinity however vast the sphere, however endless the realm."Suddenly a radiant form stood at her side, and the face of a happy stranger smiled into hers."Who are you?" asked Suzanne, recognising at once the look of friendliness, knowing this new comer sympathised with her lot."I am the soul whom Velvein was sent to guard when he left you," replied the voice. "He watched me so well through my life, that I always knew him. He spoke to me by the voice of conscience, and led me when I was uncertain of the way. Death was oh! so easy, because he whispered of the beyond. He said my wings were so strong that he need not come with me to the Gulf, but he asked me to look for you, a waiting spirit, kneeling by a rock, always watching for one still in the world. He told me to bring you a message, he was sure it would make you glad."Suzanne stood up, trembling with delight. It was so good to speak to someone who knew Velvein, and she guessed he might possibly tell her of Hugh Carlisle, who kept her from tasting the distant joys."I am so glad," she said, "that you appreciated your guardian angel in life. I could never hear Velvein's warning words, you see, I hadn't thought about spiritual guides. I loved the world so much; perhaps I should have loved it less had I known of its sorrows. What is the message you bring? Is it about the one I love?""Yes, he is coming to you almost at once, that is why Velvein stayed behind. He was going to the room where Hugh Carlisle lies dying, that he may walk with him through the gate, from the old world to the new. He will tell the wanderer not to fear, that you are waiting, purified by your long years of sacrifice, and you will be strong enough to guide him heavenward. Keep your wings about him, for his are 

somewhat feeble. Though he believed and trusted, he wasted his
talents, he might have done much good work, but preferred
solitude. He has one bright jewel in his crown, the radiant star of
faith, which shines through all his omissions, and makes him worthy
of rest. We shall meet again, you will be coming soon, Velvein told
me that."The speaker drifted away. It seemed these few moments of tarrying
proved strangely irksome with the powerful magnet shining in the
distance.Suzanne needed to console now. She thrilled to think her long term
of self-sought imprisonment was nearly over. At any moment Hugh might
come to her, Velvein would see that the released spirit found the one
who waited and longed.Even before she could see him, Suzanne heard her lover's voice
calling her by name in the far distance. She answered with a  cry of
joy. Then in a moment the twin spirits rushed together in a sudden
ecstasy of union."I know," whispered Hugh, "what you have done for me all these
years. An angel told me as I left the earth. Oh! Suzanne, how long
the years must have seemed! They were bitter indeed for me, but
bitterer far for you. Victory lay within sight, yet you gave up even
Heaven for my sake.""The old ties were strong," whispered Suzanne. "My life in the
spirit has been lived for you, just as I hoped to give my life on
earth into your keeping. Hugh, did you ever think death could be so
beautiful as this?""Yes," he said, "for I never lost my recollection of our union
on the borderland and the oneness of that rapture. Suzanne, how could
you stay on this brink with that strange magnetic influence calling
you away? Come let us reach it and find the wonder of endless life
and love.""He does not know," thought Suzanne, "that the dark
pit into which my father fell is yawning beneath our feet. But Hugh will be safe if I keep my wings round him, Velvein said so, and he always spoke the truth.""How strangely," murmured Carlisle, "this love differs from the love of earth! It is so infinitely complete, free from the awful dread of separation, robbed of all fear and misgiving. How the lovers in the world must long for the unfettered communion which is ours! Never to part, never to weep, never to misunderstand! The suffering was all worth while, for such an end as this."Their thoughts were now like some wonderful harmony mingling with the music of the spheres. Clasped in each other's arms they rose triumphantly on the brilliant rays of light which hid the Gulf below. Truly the wings of self-sacrifice were strong as eagles', and Hugh knew nothing of his own weakness, borne by the power of woman's love. Only the angels whispered in passing:—"It is often so! Woman uplifts man, and the power he calls his own is the outcome of her inspiration. The silent work is the greatest; we know that in heaven."Now the light gleamed even more brilliantly and the voices of song grew clearer."They are welcoming us," whispered Suzanne. "Earth love was dear, but there is something even greater, I know it, but I cannot give it a name."The reply came softly:—"It is love for the One who created love. The deepest adoration of our human hearts merely reflects the faintest rays of a love which has lived for all time.""We are going to the fountain of unceasing love," said Suzanne, as they drifted on joyfully through the deep calms of space, rushing exultantly to the Infinite.How young, how free, how strong, they felt! The term of waiting, and the years of gloom, meant nothing to them now.The gates of the City were opened wide to receive the incoming travellers, who no longer remembered the sorrows of earth. Suzanne even forgot the Gulf where the fallen spirits lay.Ecstasy filled their souls. Closer the lovers clung, in sweet wordless communion, among that bright winged company.The guardian of the gate spoke to Suzanne as she passed."By the strength of self-sacrifice you bear the weaker one home," he said.She hoped Hugh Carlisle had not caught the remark."I did not want him to know," she whispered back.Though her voice mingled with the chant of victory where all was blessedness and light, Hugh heard the words and smiled."Great deeds," he said, "may be overlooked on earth, but they cannot be hidden in heaven."THE END.PRINTED BY THE DEVONSHIRE PRESS, LTD., TORQUAY.Advertisements included in the back of Graham's The Pit of Corruption.Advertisements included in the back of Graham's The Pit of Corruption.